We are a confident people and a hardworking people, a decent and a compassionate people—and so we will remain.
We here in Washington must move away from crisis management, and we must establish clear goals for the future-immediate and the distant future—which will let us work together and not in conflict.
There was a good growth in business profits and investments, the source of more jobs for our workers, and a higher standard of living for all our people.
After taxes and inflation, there was a healthy increase in workers' wages.
We still have serious problems on which all of us must work together.
But we have developed an economic policy that is working, because it's simple, balanced, and fair.
When welfare reform is completed, we will have more than a million additional jobs so that those on welfare who are able to work can work.
When a level of high inflation is expected to continue, then companies raise prices to protect their profit margins against prospective increases in wages and other costs, while workers demand higher wages as protection against expected price increases.
Now, no one firm or a group of workers can halt this process.
We'll be working together.
But I think it's incumbent on us to monitor very carefully the farm situation and continue to work harmoniously with the farmers of our country.
By working closely with our friends abroad, we can promote the economic health of the whole world, with fair and balanced agreements lowering the barriers to trade.
And I am determined to protect American industry and American workers against foreign trade practices which are unfair or illegal.
But I know that the American people are still sick and tired of Federal paperwork and redtape.
We've cut the public's Federal paperwork load by more than 12 percent in less than a year.
Worked out with the civil servants themselves, this reorganization plan will restore the merit principle to a system which has grown into a bureaucratic maze.
We are hard at work with Great Britain and the Soviet Union on an agreement which will stop testing and will protect our national security and provide for adequate verification of compliance.
We are also working vigorously to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons among the nations of the world which do not now have them and to reduce the deadly global traffic in conventional arms sales.
The treaties now before the Senate are the result of the work of four administrations-two Democratic, two Republican.
We Americans have a great deal of work to do together.
In the end, how well we do that work will depend on the spirit in which we approach it.
I plan to work very closely with Congress to secure prompt action on these economic proposals.
This spring I will submit to Congress a message outlining this Administration's urban policy, based on the work of the Urban and Regional Policy Group, chaired by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Working with the Congress in the past year, we have adopted new programs and policies designed to strengthen farm income and to ensure abundant, reasonably priced food for consumers.
We will continue to monitor our agricultural economy and to work with Congressional and farm leaders to make certain that Federal programs and policies are carried out effectively.
Food and Agriculture Act    In the past year we have worked with the Congress to enact a new comprehensive Food and Agriculture Act, which will protect producers and consumers.
Agricultural Disaster and Drought Aid    Because of the record droughts in 1977, I worked with Congress to pass an $844 million Emergency Drought Assistance Program.
Teenage Pregnancy Proposal    I will propose legislation to establish networks of community based services to prevent unwanted adolescent pregnancies.
World Health    This year I will present a strategy for working directly with other nations and through international organizations to raise the standards of health and nutrition around the world.
The Administration will also work with the Congress for the creation of a separate Cabinet-level Department of Education, and for legislation to replace and reform expiring Federal education acts.
We will work actively with the Congress in the coming year to pass the Better Jobs and Income Act, and we will provide in this year's budget for pilot employment programs so we will be ready to implement the welfare reform program.
This year the Administration will continue to work for strengthened legislation against unwarranted age discrimination in the Federal and private sector.
In addition, the Administration will work to assure that the contributions of older Americans are sought in our efforts to meet national needs.
TRANSPORTATION    This year we will build on the efforts we made last year to strengthen the Nation's transportation system by decreasing consumer costs, pursuing increased energy efficiency, and improving safety:    —negotiation of a new US-UK bilateral air services agreement;    —approval of new international air routes from a number of American cities;    —requiring passive restraint systems on all new automobiles by 1984;    —setting new fuel efficiency standards for 1981-1984 model automobiles;    —beginning work on the Northeast Corridor Railroad Improvement Program;    —passing an all-cargo airline deregulation bill.
My Administration will continue to work closely with Congress toward passage of a bill that will, for the first time, establish inland waterway user fees.
No one is more frustrated by this system than hard-working public servants.
REORGANIZATION, MANAGEMENT AND REGULATORY REFORM    The Government Reorganization Project will keep working to make the Government more responsive and efficient.
Worker Health and Safety    The Occupational Health and Safety Administration has already slashed its paperwork requirements by 50% and eliminated 1,100 unnecessary regulations, while improving its capacity to protect workers.
This spring the Task Force on Worker Safety will make further recommendations to increase protection for workers and minimize employer cost.
This year, I will continue to work for passage of the airline regulatory reform bill for passengers.
Paperwork Reduction    In 1977, my Administration decreased by 12% the paperwork burden that the Government imposes on the people.
That savings is the equivalent of 50,000 full-time workers filling out Federal forms for a full year.
In addition, we are reviewing the recommendations of the Commission on Federal Paperwork.
We will work closely with Congress to ensure early passage of this bill, which is one of my highest legislative goals this year.
My Administration will work with Congress this year to pass these reforms.
I want to work with Congress this year toward passage of an undocumented aliens bill, for this social and economic problem can no longer be ignored.
Criminal Code Reform    We have worked closely with members of Congress to develop a proposed revision of the Nation's Criminal Code.
My Administration will work closely with Congress this year to seek passage of the first complete codification of the Nation's criminal laws.
Judicial Reform    The Federal judicial system has suffered for many years from an inadequate number of judges, and we will continue to work with Congress on an Omnibus Judgeship Bill to correct this problem.
We will work this year to complete Congressional action on these bills.
My Administration will continue to work for the passage of those reforms this year.
We will work with Congress to secure passage of that legislation early in 1978.
In 1978, my Administration will work towards a policy for safe, permanent disposal of nuclear wastes.
Working closely with the Congress, we have made good progress on many of the measures contained in that Message; it will continue to guide our administrative and legislative actions in 1978.
Environmental Statutes    In 1977, we worked closely with Congress to enact three of the most significant environmental statutes in recent years:    —The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act establishes a joint Federal-State program to make sure we use economically and environmentally sound strip-mining practices.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS    A year ago I set five goals for United States foreign policy in the late 1970's and early 1980's: to reassert America's moral leadership; to strengthen our traditional ties with friends and allies; to work toward a more just international system; to promote regional reconciliation; and to preserve peace through preparedness and arms control.
Working closely with our Allies, and with neutral and non-aligned nations, our delegation—led by Ambassador Arthur Goldberg—has conducted a thorough review of implementation of the Helsinki Final Act, in all its aspects.
Working with the Allies    During the past year, the United States restored our traditional friends and allies to the center of our foreign policy.
International Economic Cooperation    We are working to improve and extend the international economic system, to strengthen international economic institutions, and to ensure that international economic competition takes place in an orderly fashion.
Factors already at work will reduce our trade deficit.
International competition must take place within a framework of agreed rules that are recognized as appropriate and fair.
North-South Dialogue    Throughout 1975 and 1976 the United States and other developed countries worked with a group of developing nations in the Conference of International Economic Cooperations (CIEC).
Cyprus    We hope that the groundwork was laid in 1977 for a permanent settlement in Cyprus and we are encouraging movement in that direction.
But Americans as a united people, working with our allies and friends, have never been afraid to face problems and to solve problems, either here or abroad.
Together, we build the foundation for a strong economy, with lower inflation, without contriving either a recession with its high unemployment or unworkable, mandatory government controls.
Together, we build the foundation for a government that works—and works for people.
It's based upon my knowledge that there is a more powerful force than government compulsion—the force created by the cooperative efforts of millions of Americans working toward a common goal.
The 1980 budget provides enough spending restraint to begin unwinding inflation, but enough support for our country to keep American workers productive and to encourage the investments that provide new jobs.
Let's reduce government interference and give it a chance to work.
American workers who enlist in the fight against inflation deserve not just our gratitude, but they deserve the protection of the real wage insurance proposal that I have already made to the Congress.
With the support of the American people, government in recent decades has helped to dismantle racial barriers, has provided assistance for the jobless and the retired, has fed the hungry, has protected the safety, health, and bargaining rights of American workers, and has helped to preserve our natural heritage.
And in Iran, Nicaragua, Cyprus, Namibia, and Rhodesia, our country is working for peaceful solutions to dangerous conflicts.
I will continue to work with all my strength for equal opportunity for all Americans-and for affirmative action for those who carry the extra burden of past denial of equal opportunity.
We remain committed to improving our labor laws to better protect the rights of American workers.
Our basic goals will be to continue working with you to build solid foundations for the next century—a solid economic foundation of stable prices and continued growth—a solid foundation for a more efficient, less intrusive Federal government—a solid foundation for world peace and American security.
Throughout this year, we will be working to implement our anti-inflation program.
Part of the program requires new legislation, and we intend to work closely with you in developing and enacting that legislation.
This program will give workers a strong economic incentive to cooperate with the voluntary pay standards I have established, thereby helping to break the wage/price spiral that is at the root of the current persistent inflation.
Real wage insurance represents the type of innovative approach which is required: it will provide a significant tax benefit for those working people who participate in helping to reduce the inflationary cycle, but without raising taxes for anyone else.
My administration intends to work very closely with Congress in developing and enacting a real wage insurance law.
And just recently the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers Union reached agreement on a contract with the major refineries that met the pay standards.
The Administration will keep the Congress fully informed and involved as we work to implement this program.
The Necessities    In recent years, the greatest inflationary burden on the working men and women has involved necessities of life food, energy, housing, and medical care.
In these efforts we will work directly with Congress, State and local governments, and consumer groups.
First, we are working to reduce domestic barriers to exports so that exporters are not stifled by excessive governmental regulation.
Third, we are working with our trading partners in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations to reduce foreign barriers to our exports and to secure a fairer international trading system for all exporters.
I therefore believe it is essential that the Council, along with its staff operation, be reauthorized early this year with the additional staff I will request to handle the enormous volume of work under my anti-inflation program.
The reauthorization should not contain amendments that interrupt or restrain the necessary work of the Council or its staff.
And in inner-city areas unemployment remains much too high for all workers.
Last year, which ended with the lowest unemployment rate in 3 years, a framework for continued progress into the next decade was established:    • the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) was reauthorized at high levels for four more years;    • the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act became law after many years of effort;    • the Administration's demonstration youth programs were extended for two more years;    • a new partnership between the government and the private sector to assist the unemployed was approved by Congress with the passage of a new Title 7 of CETA—the Private Sector Initiatives Program; the targeted jobs tax credit, to encourage private employees to hire our poor young people and others who are hard to employ; and an expanded tax credit for mothers on welfare.
In 1979 this framework will help us continue to improve the employment prospects for America's workers.
We expect to achieve these goals through a number of actions:    First, we will continue working toward achievement of the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act goals.
Third, we will continue our special efforts to provide jobs and training programs for young workers in cooperation with community-based organizations and the private sector.
We must meet our responsibility to provide opportunities for young Americans to learn to work.
For the past two years, I have worked toward that goal by reorganizing and reforming the government's operation and by uncovering and removing fraud, waste and abuse.
They will include improvements in specific regulatory programs, as well as a Regulatory Reform Act so that no regulation can be issued unless it is genuinely required, and unless it gets the job done with maximum efficiency and minimum paperwork, costs, and other burdens.
None of our actions in this area will be taken at the expense of my deep personal commitment to protect health and safety in the environment, the workplace, the highway, and consumer products; and to prevent deception and unfairness to consumers.
My regulatory reform program will help make needed programs work better, cost less, and gain support among all sectors of our society.
However, other improvements in management of the government's work force are needed.
My Administration will work with Congress for passage of a sound Congressional public financing law.
Sunset    My Administration will again work with the Congress to enact a sound sunset bill.
It goes to the heart of making government work.
This year my Administration will continue to work with Congress to pass a sound lobby law reform bill—one that respects the First Amendment right of all Americans and minimizes paperwork burdens, yet allows meaningful disclosures.
Waste, Fraud, and Inefficiency    Although the vast majority of Federal employees are able, honest and hardworking, we need to continue to be vigilant to ensure that the taxpayers' dollars are not wasted through fraud or abuse.
In addition, I am committed to continuing to cut excess paperwork, simplify grants requirements, and evaluate our programs better and more frequently.
We have already significantly reduced the paperwork burden and implemented many of the recommendations of the Federal Paperwork Commission.
In addition, a new Office of Ethics in the Office of Personnel Management and a Special Counsel in the Merit System Protection Board will help ensure the integrity of the Federal work force and protect its members from political abuse.
We must work together to identify specific ways in which more flexibility can be given to State, city, and county officials in the administration of Federal programs without compromising the national purposes that each program is designed to serve.
My Administration will work with the Congress again this year to reform this framework, which includes a National Institute of Justice to enable us to obtain better information and research about crime problems.
Judgeships    Last year my Administration worked closely with the Congress to enact legislation creating the additional Federal judgeships needed to reduce our court's backlogs and delays.
These goals are within our reach, if we work together cooperatively and recognize the importance our country places in the selection of these new judges.
Its members have recently reported to me, and we will work closely with the Congress and the Judicial Conference to implement many of its recommendations.
We will continue to make existing social programs work more effectively; to reduce the waste and fraud and excess bureaucracy which drains tax dollars intended to meet basic human needs.
Based on those principles, the Administration has been working to develop a National Health Plan that will enable the country to reach the goal of comprehensive, universal health care coverage.
I expect to submit a plan later in the year shortly after those consultations have been completed, and I look forward to working with the Congress toward a prompt enactment of that plan.
She will continue to work directly with me to implement the pertinent recommendations of the Commission.
Drug Regulation Reform    My Administration will continue to work with the Congress to overhaul our current drug regulation laws in order to assure that consumers have prompt access to safe and effective drugs.
Food and Nutrition    Last year, we worked with the Congress to enact the Child Nutrition Amendments, which revamped many of our food programs and greatly expanded the Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children.
Worker Health and Safety    We will continue to fully enforce laws protecting worker health and safety in a sensible and efficient manner.
More efficient management of this program will serve the interest that both labor and management have in better working conditions.
Government attempts to help are often hampered by inappropriate, burdensome regulations and paperwork.
This year the Administration will take steps to assure that Federal regulations accommodate locally acceptable housing codes and that the endless paperwork, inspections, and processing requirements currently mandated by the three major housing agencies, HUD, FHA, and VA, are consolidated and streamlined.
We look forward to working with the Congress on many of the Commission's recommendations.
With your help, we can make the Federal government increasingly more responsive to the needs of neighborhood people who are working together to meet basic needs in housing and community development, health care, nutrition, and energy conservation.
Social Security Changes    In 1977 the Congress worked with the Administration to take the difficult but necessary action to make the Social Security system financially sound for the next fifty years.
In so doing, we helped protect the benefits of current recipients and of those now working.
We must make certain that those who should receive benefits are not excluded, but that those who are not truly disabled or can otherwise return to work, do so.
This package will enable us to develop a welfare system that is more simple, narrows the great differences in the way States help the very poor, that encourages people to work, and that helps eliminate the fraud and abuse currently plaguing parts of our welfare system.
My Administration has already begun to work closely with this Congress to enact welfare reform this year.
Our government must never impede nor work against the American family, but rather we must design programs and policies that support families and ensure that future generations of American families will thrive and prosper.
In addition, the Administration worked with the Congress to amend the Older Americans Act in a way that will improve the administration of the Act's social and housing programs, employment provisions, food delivery, and establishment of centers for the elderly.
The increased education funding will continue to be targeted at programs which emphasize equal education opportunity, support for local schools, student assistance, basic skills, and the linkages between school and work.
As is stated elsewhere in this Message, I will continue to work with the Congress to create a Cabinet-level Department of Education.
Communications    Last year we worked with Congress to reorganize communications policy-making in the Executive Branch and enact legislation to strengthen public broadcasting.
In 1979 our priorities will include:    • continued work with Congress on the important effort to revise the Communications Act to take account of technological changes;    • vigorous pursuit of the program already underway to increase minority ownership of broadcast stations through regulatory actions, government loan guarantees, and private loan and training programs;    • a program to use new communications technologies to improve rural life by delivering education, agricultural, and medical services and by increasing the diversity of radio and TV;    • elimination of unnecessary regulations and paperwork requirements in cooperation with the Federal Communications Commission;    • proposals on the role of the Postal Service in providing electronic mail services; and    • participation in the World Administrative Radio Conference to ensure that increasing demands for radio frequencies are balanced in a reasonable and flexible manner.
Through a number of actions over the past two years, my Administration has worked to help small business flourish and remain competitive.
Under the leadership of the Small Business Administration, we have increased tax incentives significantly for small business; expanded small business loan opportunities; worked to increase small business exports; expanded opportunities for minority-owned small businesses; and initiated programs to increase small business opportunities for women.
This year, while continuing efforts to prepare for the White House Conference, the Administration will work closely with the Congress to develop legislation to improve the operation and effectiveness of the Small Business Administration.
PROTECTING BASIC RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES    Since taking office, I have worked to protect and enhance the basic rights and liberties provided to Americans under the Constitution and our other laws.
We must also work to ratify the amendment that will finally give the citizens of the District of Columbia the rights other Americans have to elect voting representation in Congress.
My Administration will work with the Congress to see that this proposal is given prompt and favorable consideration.
Last year we worked closely with the Congress to extend the deadline for ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment until June 30, 1982.
We are facilitating the choice of many women to combine family and work responsibilities.
This year, in addition to continuing our efforts to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment, we will work closely with the Congress to enhance the economic standing of women—particularly the poor, minority, and elderly—by improving their access to housing, health care, and child care for those who choose to work.
District of Columbia    My Administration worked with the 95th Congress to pass a proposed amendment to the Constitution granting full voting representation to the citizens of our Nation's Capital.
My Administration will work this year in the effort to ratify this amendment.
My Administration will also work closely with the Congress and the new District Government under Mayor Marion Barry to expand home rule for the District.
I will work with Mayor Barry to make our Nation's Capital city a model for the rest of the Nation to emulate.
I am again prepared to work with the Congress to develop legislation which improves the fairness and effectiveness of our labor laws.
Export Administration/Anti-Foreign Boycott    My Administration will work with the Congress to reauthorize the Export Administration Act, which plays a vital role in ensuring that American trade serves our national interest.
Intelligence Charters    I will be working closely with the Congress to develop and enact statutory charters for the intelligence community.
My Administration will continue to work with the Congress to develop a Federal criminal code which simplifies and clarifies our criminal laws—as well as protects our basic civil liberties.
While our government and the governments of other Nations and international organizations are working to assure the basic right to food, the problems of hunger and malnutrition are a daily fact of life for millions of people throughout the world.
The Administration will be working closely with Congress on the Commission's recommendation.
The Commission's work is well underway, and I will receive its report this year.
I expect to work together with Congress in developing a suitable memorial to the millions who died in the Holocaust.
Building upon the framework of the National Energy Act, signed last November, we will be addressing key issues such as further developing and commercializing solar and renewable energy resources, making better use of our coal reserves and other abundant energy resources, continuing our emphasis on using energy more efficiently, and improving the manner in which we produce and use conventional sources of energy such as oil, natural gas, and uranium.
As a result of the work of the Interagency Review Group on Waste Management, I will be making a series of legislative and administrative recommendations to ensure that the necessary schedules, coordination, and legislative authorities are firmly in place.
With this new framework, the Administration is proceeding to implement swiftly new programs which will permit increased leasing and development activities while protecting our environment.
The Congress and the Administration have worked together, over the past two years to achieve this goal.
Roadless Area Designations (Rare II)    The Agriculture Department has released tentative recommendations and nearly completed work on a study which will lead to proposals to resolve the status of most of the remaining roadless areas in the National Forest System.
EPA will simplify and consolidate its permit programs to reduce paperwork, red tape and delays.
International Agricultural Trade    Over the past 2 years, this Administration has worked to reduce barriers to international trade and to develop new markets and encourage increased exports of agricultural products.
To help stabilize world sugar prices, to satisfy our international commitments, and to protect our domestic sugar producers, my Administration is committed to working with the Congress to develop an effective, non-inflationary domestic sugar program early in this session, and to achieve ratification of the International Sugar Agreement.
Rural Development    Throughout 1978 my Administration took steps to make existing Federal rural development programs work better.
Progress towards these goals depends first on our ability as a Nation to work together in the common interest.
Through our summit meetings, and through an unprecedented pattern of consultations at other levels of our governments, we are working together on virtually all of today's most critical issues:    • together we are seeking to reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation;    • we are working on ways to strengthen the common defense;    • we are attempting to promote a peaceful transition in southern Africa;    • we are striving to resolve conflicts in the Eastern Mediterranean to support a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and to maintain stability in the Persian Gulf;    • we are contributing to a sounder international economy;    • we are consulting on the issues that confront all our societies: the problems of youth and age, family and community, growth and conservation—in short, advancing our democratic ideals at home in a time of change in each of our countries.
There are other areas where our two nations can work constructively together.
We are heartened by the support of the African leaders who have worked with us in efforts to resolve the Namibian and Rhodesian issues.
We see this in the wages of our workers who produce goods for export, in the choice of goods for our consumers, in the price of energy.
We must work closely with other countries to ensure that the world economy can steadily develop through non-inflationary growth, while together we manage the use of its resources and protect our environment.
We worked out a strategy of cooperation with our partners to improve the world economic situation: within the framework of those Summit decisions, West Germany and Japan have taken measures to stimulate their economies while we are giving top priority to fighting inflation.
We have strengthened the dollar by working out arrangements with other countries to counter speculative disorder in currency markets.
We are now close to new agreements with our trading partners to establish a fairer, better operating and more open framework for world trade.
I am convinced that our economy can adapt to changing patterns of world trade in ways that protect the future of our workers.
I therefore urge Congressional approval of the funding we propose for our bilateral assistance programs and our participation in the work of the multilateral development banks and UN agencies.
My proposal to establish a Foundation of International Technological Cooperation reflects our recognition that scientists in many developing nations are ready to work in collaboration with our technological institutions to solve the great problems of health, nutrition, productivity and other aspects of economic development.
By continuing to work together, my Administration and the Congress can meet these goals.
Our task in this Session is to complete the work on that program.
RECORD OF PROGRESS    When I took office in 1977, our Nation faced a number of serious domestic and international problems:    • the economy had still not recovered from the most serious recession since World War II;    • unemployment was near 8%, and almost 8 million American workers were unemployed;    • no national energy policy existed, and our dependence on foreign oil was rapidly increasing;    • public trust in the integrity and openness of the government was extremely low;    • the Federal government was operating inefficiently in administering essential programs and policies;    • major social problems were being ignored or poorly addressed by the Federal government;    • our defense posture was declining as a result of a continuously shrinking defense budget;    • the strength of the NATO Alliance was at a post-World War II low;    • tensions between Israel and Egypt threatened another Middle East war; and    • America's resolve to oppose international aggression and human rights violations was under serious question.
As in the previous three years, I will be working with you toward the basic goals of:    • Ensuring our economic strength;    • Creating energy security for our nation;    • Enhancing basic human and social needs;    • Making our government more efficient and effective;    • Protecting and enhancing our rights and liberties;    • Preserving and developing our natural resources;    • Building America's military strength;    • Working to resolve international disputes through peaceful means;    • Striving to resolve pressing international economic problems;    • Continuing to support the building of democratic institutions and protecting human rights; and    • Preventing the spread and further development of nuclear weapons.
• Youth Education, Training and Employment Program—This new initiative, which is designed to educate and train youth to secure and hold meaningful jobs, will provide enhanced opportunities for disadvantaged youth as well as improve the productivity of our work force.
• Countercyclical Revenue Sharing—I will again work with the Congress to provide the aid needed to help our most financially pressed local areas.
Toward that end, we will be working with Members from States which have not yet been ratified.
WORKING TO RESOLVE INTERNATIONAL DISPUTES    • Refugee Legislation and Funding-This legislation is necessary to improve our refugee program and to provide needed domestic assistance to refugees.
Prompt House action would assure that we have a sound framework within which to accommodate the increasing flow of refugees.
In 1980, we will continue the steady economic policies which have worked to date.
I am confident that we can work together successfully this year to achieve our economic goals.
The reauthorization should not contain amendments that interrupt or restrain the important and essential work of the Council or its staff.
FISCAL POLICY    As President, I have been concerned about the tax burden on our citizens and have, as a result, worked with the Congress to enact two major tax cuts.
EMPLOYMENT    My Administration, working closely with Congress, has made significant progress in reducing the serious unemployment problems that existed three years ago.
We will continue to make progress in the 1980's as a result of the framework which has already been established and which will be strengthened this year.
This year, we will work aggressively to make certain that this framework continues to be successfully implemented.
The economic challenges of the 1980's will require the energy and commitment of the entire American work force.
The program will have two key components: for in school youth, we will have a major effort through the Department of Education to teach basic skills to low-achieving youth in junior and senior high schools located in low-income communities, while providing work experience and training after school hours.
For disadvantaged out-of-school youth, we will provide, through the Department of Labor, redesigned and expanded work experience and training programs, as well as basic skills programs managed by the Department of Education.
The new program will emphasize:    —basic skills for low-achieving youngsters, including help for students with limited ability in English;    —school-wide planning with the active involvement of teachers, parents, employers, and the community;    —using the link between work and classroom-learning as a way to motivate students to stay in school; and    —a major role for vocational education in preparing young people for work.
The program will emphasize:    —additional training and work experience opportunities for older and out-of-school youth;    —stringent performance standards for both participants and program operators;    —financial incentives to encourage greater cooperation between CETA sponsors, local employers, and school officials; and    —consolidation of three of the existing CETA youth programs and closer coordination with the summer employment program to simplify local administration and reduce paperwork.
We will be working closely and intensively with the Congress to enact and carry out this youth employment program as soon as possible.
I look forward to working with the Congress on ways we can continue to improve our trading position which, in turn, will help maintain a prosperous American economy.
We have made great strides in reforming our regulatory process, cutting down Federal paperwork and developing flexible regulations which provide for minimizing or eliminating burdens on smaller businesses.
To reduce the paperwork and regulatory burdens small businesses face in raising capital, I have recently proposed a Small Business Issuers' Simplification Act.
MINORITY BUSINESS    From the beginning of my term, I have worked with the Congress to increase opportunities for minority business.
As a result of our efforts, enormous progress has been made in the last three years:    • Federal procurement from minority owned firms has increased by nearly two and a half times;    • Federal deposits in minority-owned banks have nearly doubled;    • minority ownership of radio and television stations has increased by 65%;    • almost 15% of the funds spent under the Local Public Works Act of 1977 went to minority-owned firms;    • the Section 8(a) program operated by the Small Business Administration has been reformed and strengthened.
I urge the conferees to complete this work expeditiously so that the Corporation can open its doors as early as possible this year.
In developing this plan, we have given priority attention to accommodating essential gasoline usage, bearing in mind the need to design a plan which is workable and which can be put into place quickly if a severe emergency arises.
My Administration will work very closely with Congress on the standby plan.
I consider this new program to be an essential piece of my overall conservation strategy and urge the House-Senate Conference Committee now working on the bill containing this provision to complete work promptly.
We will continue to work with the Congress this session on passage of critical solar energy legislation.
I endorsed the approach the NRC adopted to pause in licensing, but have urged the Commission to complete its work as quickly as possible, and in any event no later than June of this year.
I am eager to work with the Congress on my alcohol fuels program, so that we can soon have legislation that will authorize and provide the funding for this important energy development.
My Administration will continue to work with the Congress to enact legislation establishing an Inland Energy Assistance program, with funding of $150 million per year, to aid those States and local areas which are experiencing a rapid growth in population as a result of new energy supply development.
The Administration and the Congress, working together, have demonstrated that government must and can meet our citizens' basic human and social needs in a responsible and compassionate way.
The legislation is before the Congress, and I will be working with you toward its enactment.
When that comparison is completed, I am convinced the Congress will see the need for and the benefits of my Plan and work toward prompt enactment.
This strategy includes increased funding for many new and continuing programs in the areas of environmental hazards, workplace health and safety, commercial product safety, traffic safety, community water fluoridation, and health education, promotion and information.
We must work together this year to enact CHAP and thereby provide millions of needy children with essential health services.
This year, my Administration will be working intensively with the Congress for prompt enactment of this important legislation, and the First Lady will continue her substantial work in this area, as an effective spokesperson and advocate for mental health reform throughout the country.
WORKER HEALTH AND SAFETY    My Administration will continue to enforce fully laws protecting worker health and safety in a sensible and efficient manner.
More effective management of our worker safety programs will serve the interest that both labor and management have in better working conditions.
FOOD AND NUTRITION    Building on the comprehensive reform of the Food Stamp Program that I proposed and Congress passed in 1977, my Administration and the Congress worked together last year to enact several other important changes in the Program.
In this session, I will continue to work with the Congress to achieve additional improvements in the Food Stamp Program and to eliminate permanently the expenditure cap.
The Department will cut red tape and paperwork to make the flow of Federal dollars to school districts and institutions of higher education more efficient, thereby providing students and educators with more benefits per dollar of Federal funds.
We are determined to work closely with the Congress this year in making certain that the Department begins on a sound basis, consistent with the purposes and hopes Congress had when creating it.
Our proposals would eliminate much of the paperwork and confusion that have plagued students, parents, and colleges by mandating a single application form for all Federal need-based assistance.
We are eager to work with the Congress to achieve this goal as soon as possible.
This proposal is embodied in two bills—The Work and Training Opportunities Act and The Social Welfare Reform Amendments Act.
Within the framework of our present welfare system, my reform proposals offer achievable means to increase self-sufficiency through work rather than welfare, more adequate assistance to people unable to work, the removal of inequities in coverage under current programs, and fiscal relief needed by States and localities.
CHILD WELFARE    My Administration has worked closely with the Congress on legislation which is designed to improve greatly the child welfare services and foster care programs and to create a Federal system of adoption assistance.
The work of the Congress on this legislation is now almost completed.
I will also review closely the work of several major study groups, and will consult with experts in the Department of Health and Human Services and the Congress to assess their recommendations.
Last year, my Administration proposed modifications in the program to further improve its administration and to increase incentives for disabled beneficiaries to seek rehabilitation and to return to work.
In 1980, we will work with the Congress to enact these reforms.
My Administration will again be working with the Congress to pass the condominium reform legislation that I proposed last year.
The Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 is working well, with reduced passenger fares per mile, and with the airlines better able to withstand the effects of recession and fuel price increases than would have otherwise been possible.
This year, we will be working with the Congress to pass legislation that embodies our interest in expanded trade and a strong merchant marine fleet.
This conference, the culmination of three years of work, will help focus public attention on the problems affecting families and on the means needed to solve or avoid those problems.
Early in this term we worked successfully with the Congress to assure adequate revenues for the Social Security Trust Funds.
Further, the Administration worked closely with Congress to amend the Older Americans Act in a way that has already improved administration of its housing, social services, food delivery, and employment programs.
I am hopeful that the conferees will complete their work shortly so that we can get these essential programs underway.
That legislation is now in Conference, and I urge the conferees to complete their work soon, so that we can provide a foundation for the economic development of our Nation in the 1980's.
Last December I announced our Small Community and Rural Development Policy, which is the culmination of several years' work and is designed to address these pressing problems now affecting rural areas.
This policy provides that capacity, backed by my personal commitment to make it work.
My Administration will be working with the Congress this year to pass legislation needed to fulfill the commitment of this rural policy initiative.
This year, under the leadership of my Special Assistant for Consumer Affairs we will be working to make certain that the Order is faithfully implemented and that consumers receive better protection and assistance from Federal agencies.
NATIONAL CONSUMER COOPERATIVE BANK    My Administration worked closely with the Congress to create the National Consumer Cooperative Bank.
To bring the fruits of this work to increasing numbers of the public at large, support will be provided for humanities activities in libraries, museums, and media, as well as for a variety of special activities tailored to the needs of groups that have traditionally not had ready access to opportunities for learning in the humanities.
My Administration worked with the last Congress to pass a proposed Constitutional amendment granting full voting representation to the citizens of our Nation's Capital.
My Administration will continue to work closely with the Congress and Mayor Barry to expand home rule for the District, including development of a sensible formula for determining the Federal payment to the District.
I will continue working with Mayor Barry to make our Nation's Capital City a model for the rest of the Nation.
The Council and my Administration will work closely with the Congress as we establish an appropriate memorial to the six million Jews and the millions of other victims of Nazism during World War II.
Regulatory burdens—such as airline regulation and government paperwork—have been reduced or eliminated.
This coming year, I intend to work with the Congress to improve further the government's ability to serve the nation effectively.
In 1980, we will continue to pursue further reform of regulations through legislation designed to make permanent a new framework for managing the regulatory process, and legislation to reduce paperwork and red tape.
We have vigorously implemented legislation passed last year to establish independent inspectors general in each department and coordinated their work through the Executive Group to Combat Fraud and Waste in Government.
This is tough, unglamorous work, but it is essential to reduce the cost of government and to provide better service to the American people.
The Congress supported it, and I am pleased to report it is working very well.
This regulatory system works to stifle competition, waste fuel, reduce service to small towns, and inflate prices.
My Administration will continue to work to eliminate these wasteful conditions and the regulatory structure which helps cause them.
This year we will work closely with Congress to achieve final approval of our financial reform objectives: the phaseout of Regulation Q deposit rate ceilings, the broadening of the asset and liability process of thrift institutions, the approval of legislation to stem the decline in Federal Reserve membership, and the elimination of other unwarranted regulatory restraints.
In addition, we need this legislation to smooth the transition to a competitive environment by protecting workers' rights, ensuring against any large increases for rural telephone rates and providing needed national security and emergency preparedness powers.
Administration efforts include:    • working to increase minority participation; already our program has helped produce a two-thirds increase in minority ownership of broadcast stations, and we will continue that progress;    • working with the Federal Communications Commission to continue to eliminate needless paperwork and regulations;    • pursuing plans to open up channels for as many as 1,000 new radio stations, to improve service to rural areas and provide more opportunities for minorities;    • developing proposals to improve the way frequencies are assigned, including incentives for users to conserve the increasingly crowded radio spectrum;    • encouraging the use of satellites, cable TV, and other technologies to deliver public services and to improve rural communications;    • working with Congress and the FCC to protect First Amendment rights and the free flow of information, through such measures as my bill on police searches of newsrooms; and    • continuing to support a strong, independent public broadcasting system and working to increase its coverage to reach all Americans.
SUNSET    We will continue to work with Congress to pass sunset legislation.
PAPERWORK REDUCTION    In the past three years, my Administration has cut the amount of time Americans spend filling out Federal forms by 127 million hours—almost 15%.
However, Congress is enacting new paperwork requirements in energy, environmental protection, and other areas, and we must have legislation to provide the strong administrative controls that will be needed to minimize these burdens.
I urge Congress to pass a Paperwork Reduction Act to close the wide loopholes in Executive Branch oversight power and create new authority to halt duplicative data collection.
This year my Administration will again work with Congress to pass a sound lobby law reform bill—one that respects the First Amendment rights of all Americans and minimizes paperwork burdens, yet allows meaningful disclosures.
The Administration will be working with Congress to develop a single policy to guide the Departments and Agencies dealing with patents resulting from federally-sponsored research.
PROTECTING BASIC RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES    Since taking office, I have worked to protect and enhance the basic fights and liberties guaranteed to Americans under the Constitution and our other laws.
This year, though, important work remains to be done if our goal of ensuring equality and basic freedoms for all Americans is to be realized.
At the same time, the reorganization mandate to eliminate unnecessary costs, paperwork and other burdens to businesses is being vigorously implemented by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
As one of our Nation's most outstanding leaders, it is appropriate that his birthday be commemorated as a national holiday, and I will continue to work with the Congress to enact legislation that will achieve this goal.
We will continue to work with the Congress during 1980 to enact this long-overdue authority.
In 1980, we will continue to work with the Congress toward enactment of this legislation.
On the basis of the sound consultative work done already with Congress, I plan to submit a proposed charter early this year.
HATCH ACT REFORM    Federal employees who work in nonsensitive positions should have the right to participate in off-the-job political activities.
My Administration will continue to work with the Congress to develop a Federal criminal code which simplifies and clarifies our criminal laws, while maintaining our basic civil liberties and protections.
I am again ready to work with the Congress to develop legislation which improves the fairness and effectiveness of our labor laws.
While my Administration has worked to improve programs serving the handicapped, we must continue to push for removal of psychological and physical barriers against handicapped people in our society.
The International Year will enable this country—with the public and private sector working together-to demonstrate its commitment to the disabled and to teach or learn from other nations about ways to advance the quality of life of handicapped individuals.
We have spearheaded work in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development toward this end, and guidelines have been drafted for adoption this year.
Since I have been in office, I have worked with the Congress to preserve, protect and where appropriate, develop our natural resources.
We will continue to work with the Congress to pass legislation needed to improve further Federal water resources programs and to support the States in their primary responsibilities for water allocation and management.
Agriculture    AGRICULTURAL PROGRESS    While much work remains to be done, America's agriculture is by far the best in the world.
Because of the aggressive efforts of American farmers and businessmen, working in cooperation with Federal representatives, and the provision of new authorities by Congress, we have set new export records in each of the past 3 years.
Congress has made clear progress in devising an improved crop insurance program, but work remains to be done.
I urge the Congress to finish its work on this legislation as soon as possible.
We are prepared to work with the government of Iran to develop a new and mutually beneficial relationship.
This growth will enable us to develop new technical means of intelligence collection while also assuring that the more traditional methods of intelligence work are also given proper stress.
There remains much work to be done in strengthening NATO's conventional defense; the work proceeding under the Alliance's Long Term Defense Program will help achieve this objective.
This action, though indispensable in its own right, also supported our continuing efforts to promote a solution to the Cyprus problem and to bring about the reintegration of Greece within the military framework of the Atlantic Alliance, objectives which retain high priority this year.
My trip to the Far East helped forge closer working relationships with Japan and Korea.
Over the past year I have worked to stabilize the United States military presence in Asia by concluding an amended base agreement with the Philippines that will last until 1991.
We have also sought to develop an enduring institutional framework in the economic, cultural, scientific, and trade areas.
At the historic signing ceremony at the White House, Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat repeated their Camp David pledge to work for full autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza.
Since then Egypt and Israel have been working to complete this part of the Camp David framework and to provide an opportunity for the Palestinian people to participate in determining their future.
We will continue to work vigorously for a comprehensive peace in the Middle East, building on the unprecedented achievements at Camp David.
We have been working with countries in the region on shared security concerns.
We must help the regional states develop a capability to withstand Soviet pressures in a strengthened framework for cooperation in the region.
We are also working closely with other friends of Pakistan to increase the resources available for Pakistan's development and security.
We are prepared to work closely with our friends in the region, on a cooperative basis, to do whatever is required to ensure that aggressors would bear heavy costs so that further aggression is deterred.
But this in no way diminishes our commitment to work to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation, in Pakistan or elsewhere.
LATIN AMERICA    Since my inauguration, I have worked hard to forge a new, collaborative relationship with the nations of Latin America and the Caribbean—one resting on a firm commitment to human rights, democratization, economic development and non-intervention.
There is a threat that intervention by Cuba may thwart the desire of the people of the region for progress within a democratic framework and we have been working closely with the governments in the region to try to aid in the developmental process of the region and are prepared to assist those threatened by outside intervention.
These binding commitments, signed by all the major trading nations, provide the framework for a new era in international trading relations with them and with the developing nations.
COMMON FUND    The United States joined members of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, both developed and developing nations, in negotiating an agreement on the framework of a Common Fund to help international commodity agreements stabilize the prices of raw materials.
Our ability to work together with developing nations toward goals we have in common-their political independence, the resolution of regional tensions, and our growing ties of trade for example—require us to maintain the policy of active engagement with the developing world that we have pursued over the past three years.
The work of our own Institute of Scientific and Technological Cooperation will further strengthen the search for relevant new agricultural technologies.
Working together with the Congress, I remain committed to the vigorous pursuit of our non-proliferation objectives.
We are working with our allies to prevent conflict in the Middle East.
I'm also working, along with the leaders of other nations, to provide additional military and economic aid for Pakistan.
Finally, we are prepared to work with other countries in the region to share a cooperative security framework that respects differing values and political beliefs, yet which enhances the independence, security, and prosperity of all.
We will continue to work as we have for peace in the Middle East and southern Africa.
As you well know, I have been working with the Congress in a concentrated and persistent way over the past 3 years to meet this need.
Second, as we continue to work with business to hold down prices, we'll build also on the historic national accord with organized labor to restrain pay increases in a fair fight against inflation.
Third, we will continue our successful efforts to cut paperwork and to dismantle unnecessary Government regulation.
Fourth, we will continue our progress in providing jobs for America, concentrating on a major new program to provide training and work for our young people, especially minority youth.
Together as one people, let us work to build our strength at home, and together as one indivisible union, let us seek peace and security throughout the world.
And I believe the Congress should be proud as well, for so much of what has been accomplished over the past four years has been due to the hard work, insights and cooperation of Congress.
While my term as President will end before the 97th Congress begins its work in earnest, I hope that my recommendations will serve as a guide for the direction this country should take so we build on the record of the past four years.
Through a tax-based incomes policy (TIP) we could provide tax incentives for firms and workers to moderate their wage and price increases.
EMPLOYMENT    During the last four years we have given top priority to meeting the needs of workers and providing additional job opportunities to those who seek work.
As a result a $2 billion youth education and jobs initiative was introduced to provide unemployed youth with the basic education and work experience they need to compete in the labor market of the 1980's.
In the automobile industry, we have worked—without resort to import quotas—to strengthen the industry's ability to modernize and compete effectively.
In the interim I hope that the incoming Administration and the new Congress will work with the committee I have established to keep these business development ideas alive and help implement Conference recommendations.
The framework put in place over the last four years will enable us to do this.
My Administration has worked through the Interagency Coal Task Force Study to promote cooperation and coordination of resources between shippers, railroads, vessel broker/operators and port operators, and to determine the most appropriate Federal role in expanding and modernizing coal export facilities, including dredging deeper channels at selected ports.
Private industry will, of course, play the major role in developing the United States' coal export facilities, but the government must continue to work to facilitate transportation to foreign markets.
My Administration and the Congress, working together, have demonstrated that government must and can meet our citizens' basic human and social needs in a responsible and compassionate way.
I hope the Congress will see the need for and the benefits of my Plan and work toward prompt enactment.
This will necessitate adoption of a broader concept of health care, to include such areas as environmental health, workplace health and safety, commercial product safety, traffic safety, and health education, promotion and information.
FOOD AND NUTRITION    Building on the comprehensive reform of the Food Stamp Program that I proposed and Congress passed in 1977, my Administration and the Congress worked together in 1979 and 1980 to enact several other important changes in the Program.
Third, we must focus our efforts on drug and alcohol abuse in the workplace for not only does this abuse contribute to low productivity but it also destroys the satisfaction and sense of purpose all Americans can gain from the work experience.
Working with the Congressional leadership, my Administration spotlighted the importance of education by creating a new Department of Education.
The Department has made strides to cut red tape and paperwork and thereby to make the flow of Federal dollars to school districts and institutions of higher education more efficient.
The Middle Income Student Assistance Act, legislation jointly sponsored by this Administration and the Congressional leadership, expanded eligibility for need-based Basic Educational Opportunity Grants to approximately one-third of the students enrolled in postsecondary education and made many more students eligible for the first time for other types of grants, work-study, and loans.
Just three and a half months ago, my Administration and the Congress successfully concluded over two years of work on a major reauthorization bill that further expands benefits to postsecondary education.
Supplementing these legislative accomplishments have been important administrative actions aimed at reducing paperwork and simplifying regulations associated with Federal education programs.
Last year, I proposed to the Congress a major legislative initiative that would direct $2 billion into education and job training programs designed to alleviate youth unemployment through improved linkages between the schools and the work place.
Only by combining a basic skills education program together with work training and employment incentives can we make substantial progress in eliminating one of the most severe social problems in our nation—youth unemployment, particularly among minorities.
The earned benefits that are paid monthly to retired and disabled American workers and their families provide a significant measure of economic protection to millions of people who might otherwise face retirement or possible disability with fear.
This proposal is embodied in two bills—The Work and Training Opportunities Act and The Social Welfare Reform Amendments Act.
Within the framework of our present welfare system, my reform proposals offer achievable means to increase self-sufficiency through work rather than welfare, more adequate assistance to people unable to work, the removal of inequities in coverage under current programs, and fiscal relief needed by States and localities.
CHILD WELFARE    My Administration has worked closely with the Congress on legislation which is designed to improve greatly the child welfare services and foster care programs and to create a Federal system of adoption assistance.
Working with the Congress, the regulatory agencies, and the financial community, my Administration has brought about an expanded and steadier flow of funds into home mortgages.
We have also worked to expand homeownership opportunities for Americans.
By reducing paperwork and regulation in Federal programs, and by working with State and local governments to ease the regulatory burden, we have helped to hold down housing costs and produce affordable housing.
By making a long-term commitment to provide a framework for greater investment, sustained economic growth, and price stability, my Administration has begun the work of creating a healthy environment for housing.
Staggers Rail Act of 1980, my Administration, working with the Congress, has initiated a new era of reduced regulation of transportation industries.
HIGHWAYS    Our vast network of highways, which account for 90 percent of travel and 80 percent by value of freight traffic goods movement, is deteriorating.
My Administration has worked through the Interagency Coal Task Force Study, which I created, to promote cooperation and coordination of resources between shippers, railroads, vessel broker/operators and port operators, and to determine the most appropriate Federal role in expanding and modernizing coal export facilities, including dredging deeper channels at selected ports.
The new Administration should continue to work to eliminate transportation bottlenecks that impede our access to foreign markets.
That review provides excellent guidance for the work remaining in our battle against sex discrimination.
I remain committed to the Equal Rights Amendment and will continue to work for its passage.
The years ahead will require steadfast dedication by the President to protect and promote these precious rights in the classroom, in the workplace, and in all public facilities so that handicapped individuals may join the American mainstream and contribute to the fullest their resources and talents to our economic and social life.
Just as we supported, in an unprecedented way, the civil rights of disabled persons in schools and in the workplace, other initiatives in health prevention-such as our immunization and nutrition programs for young children and new intense efforts to reverse spinal cord injury must continue so that the incidence of disability continues to decline.
As public policy is developed and implemented by the Federal government, cognizance of the work of the Conference should be taken as a pragmatic and essential step.
Early in my term we worked successfully with the Congress to assure adequate revenues for the Social Security Trust Funds.
In addition, my Administration worked very closely with Congress to amend the Older Americans Act in a way that has already improved administration of its housing, social services, food delivery, and employment programs.
This year the Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy will complete its work and forward its advice and recommendations.
My commitment to veterans—as evidenced by my record—is characterized by a conscientious and consistent emphasis in these general areas:    First, we have worked to honor the Vietnam veteran.
It was the culmination of several years' work and was designed to address the varying needs of our rural population.
In 1980, my Administration worked with the Congress to pass the Rural Development Policy Act of 1980, which when fully implemented will allow us to meet the needs of rural people and their communities more effectively and more efficiently.
• Established a White House Working Group to assist in the implementation of the policy.
• Worked with more than 40 governors to form State rural development councils to work in partnership with the White House Working Group, and the Federal agencies, to better deliver State and Federal programs to rural areas.
• Directed the White House Working Group to annually review existing and proposed policies, programs, and budget levels to determine their adequacy in meeting rural needs and the fulfilling of the policy's objectives and principles.
While substantial progress has been made in assuring a consumer presence in Federal agencies, work must continue to meet fully the goals of the Executive Order.
The Administration has established a framework for a strong and evolving space program for the 1980's.
I have worked to improve the relationship between the Federal establishment and the Government of the District of Columbia in order to further the goals and spirit of home rule.
It is my hope that during the coming years the new Administration and the Congress will:    • Continue support of institutions promoting development and understanding of the arts;    • Encourage business participants in a comprehensive effort to achieve a truly mixed economy of support for the arts;    • Explore a variety of mechanisms to nurture the creative talent of our citizens and build audiences for their work;    • Support strong, active National Endowments for the Arts;    • Seek greater recognition for the rich cultural tradition of the nation's minorities;    • Provide grants for the arts in low income neighborhoods.
Our Government's support for the humanities, within the framework laid down by the Congress, is a recognition of their essential nourishment of the life of the mind and vital enrichment of our national life.
In the allocation of this funding, special emphasis will be given to:    • Humanities education in the nation's schools, in response to the great needs that have arisen in this area;    • Scholarly research designed to increase our understanding of the cultures, traditions, and historical forces at work in other nations and in our own;    • Drawing attention to the physical disintegration of the raw material of our cultural heritage—books, manuscripts, periodicals, and other documents—and to the development of techniques to prevent the destruction and to preserve those materials; and    • The dissemination of quality programming in the humanities to increasingly large American audiences through the use of radio and television.
The dominant effort in the Endowment's expenditures will be a commitment to strengthen and promulgate scholarly excellence and achievement in work in the humanities in our schools, colleges, universities, libraries, museums and other cultural institutions, as well as in the work of individual scholars or collaborative groups engaged in advanced research in the humanities.
We have discarded old economic regulations that prevented competition and raised consumer costs, and we have imposed strong management principles on the regulatory programs the country needs, cutting paperwork and other wasteful burdens.
While these initiatives represent dramatic progress in economic deregulation, continued work is needed.
PAPERWORK REDUCTION    The Federal Government imposes a huge paperwork burden on business, local government, and the private sector.
During my Administration we cut the paperwork burden by 15 percent, and we created procedures to continue this progress.
The new Paperwork Reduction Act centralizes, in OMB, oversight of all agencies' information requirements and strengthens OMB's authority to eliminate needless forms.
The "paperwork budget" process, which I established by executive order, applies the discipline of the budget process to the hours of reporting time imposed on the public, forcing agencies to scrutinize all their forms each year.
With effective implementation, these steps should allow further, substantial paperwork cuts in the years ahead.
The new Administration should continue the work which has been begun to develop a Federal criminal code which simplifies and clarifies our criminal laws, while maintaining our basic civil liberties and protections.
We worked with Congress to pass legislation restricting wiretaps and law enforcement access to bank records and to reporters' files.
We also worked with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to establish international guidelines to protect the privacy of personal information that is transferred across borders.
From the beginning of my Administration, I have worked with the Congress to enhance and protect, as well as develop our natural resources.
• We have worked domestically and with our allies to respond to an uncertain energy situation by conservation and diversification of energy supplies based on internationally agreed targets.
• Second, we will pursue an active diplomacy in the world, working—together with our friends and allies—to resolve disputes through peaceful means and to make any aggressor pay a heavy price.
We are prepared to work with the government of Iran to develop a new and mutually beneficial relationship.
We are working closely with our European allies to secure the Host Nation Support necessary to enable us to deploy more quickly a greater ratio of combat forces to the European theater at a lower cost to the United States.
This growth will enable us to develop new technical means of intelligence collection while also assuring that the more traditional methods of intelligence work are also given proper stress.
In the NATO area, we continued to work closely with other countries in providing resources to help Turkey regain economic health.
We have established a pattern of frequent and frank consultations between our two governments, exemplified by a series of high-level visits and by regular exchanges at the working level, through which we have been able to identify increasingly broad areas of common interest on which we can cooperate.
We have worked closely with ASEAN and the UN to press for withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia and to encourage a political settlement in Cambodia which permits that nation to be governed by leaders of its own choice.
And, on humanitarian grounds and in support of our friends in the region, we have worked vigorously with international organizations to arrange relief and resettlement for the exodus of Indochinese refugees which threatened to overwhelm these nations.
We have taken effective measures to control our own consumption of imported fuel, working in cooperation with the other key industrial nations of the world.
We have worked with Africa in a spirit of mutual cooperation to help the African nations solve their problems of poverty and to develop stronger ties between our private sector and African economies.
We, together with African leaders, urged the release of political prisoners, and many have been released; we provided emergency economic assistance to help avoid economic collapse, and helped to involve the IMF and the banking community to bring about economic stability; and we have worked closely with the new leaders to maintain Liberia's strong ties with the West and to protect America's vital interests.
We support social and economic development within a democratic framework.
In a resolution adopted without opposition, the OAS General Assembly in November strongly supported the work of the Commission.
Canal employees, American and Panamanian alike, have remained on the job and have found their living and working conditions virtually unchanged.
By holding periodic meetings of its various working groups, we have been able to prevent mutual concerns from becoming political issues.
We are also working together to see that those nations most seriously affected by the oil disruption—including our key NATO allies Turkey and Portugal—can get the oil they need.
We are working together with all our allies and friends in this effort.
This report builds on the work of the International Energy Agency's Coal Industry Advisory Board.
We are working cooperatively with other nations to increase energy security in other areas as well.
Our ability to work together with developing nations toward goals we have in common—their political independence, the resolution of regional tensions, and our growing ties of trade for example—require us to maintain the policy of active involvement with the developing world that we have pursued over the past four years.
However, in spite of lengthy efforts in the United Nations, agreement has not been reached on how to launch a process of Global Negotiations in which nations might collectively work to solve such important issues as energy, food, protectionism, and population pressures.
It will continue to work to move the North-South dialogue into a more constructive phase.
Our government, working in concert with the UN's Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), helped to respond to that need.
The work of our own Institute of Scientific and Technological Cooperation will further strengthen the search for relevant new agricultural technologies.
• The Organization of American States, in its annual General Assembly, approved a resolution in support of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission's work.
• The United States was able to rejoin the International Labor Organization after an absence of two years, as that UN body reformed its procedures to return to its original purpose of strengthening employer-employee-government relations to insure human rights for the working people of the world.
• Second, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), which was completed in 1980, demonstrated that suppliers and recipients can work together on these technically complex and sensitive issues.
• Finally, we are working to encourage regional cooperation and restraint.
Almost 8 million Americans are out of work.
The threats of layoff and unemployment hang over other millions, and all who work are frustrated by their inability to keep up with inflation.
Not only have hourly earnings of the American worker, after adjusting for inflation, declined 5 percent over the past 5 years, but in these 5 years, Federal personal taxes for the average family have increased 67 percent.
This, plus strong and effective work requirements, will save $520 million in the next year.
The Trade Adjustment Assistance program provides benefits for workers who are unemployed when foreign imports reduce the market for various American products, causing shutdown of plants and layoff of workers.
The purpose is to help these workers find jobs in growing sectors of our economy.
Now, we know of course that the categorical grant programs burden local and State governments with a mass of Federal regulations and Federal paperwork.
And that can only be done with a tax program which provides incentive to increase productivity for both workers and industry.
The average worker's wage will rise in real purchasing power 8 percent, and this is in after-tax dollars.
These won't be make-work jobs.
I'm well aware that there are many other desirable and needed tax changes, such as indexing the income tax brackets to protect taxpayers against inflation; the unjust discrimination against married couples if both are working and earning; tuition tax credits; the unfairness of the inheritance tax, especially to the family-owned farm and the family-owned business; and a number of others.
We've tried that, and surely we must be able to see it doesn't work.
Over 7 million man and woman hours of work by State and local officials are required to fill out government forms.
We don't have an option of living with inflation and its attendant tragedy, millions of productive people willing and able to work but unable to find a buyer for their work in the job market.
What we do and say here will make all the difference to autoworkers in Detroit, lumberjacks in the Northwest, steelworkers in Steubenville who are in the unemployment lines; to black teenagers in Newark and Chicago; to hard-pressed farmers and small businessmen; and to millions of everyday Americans who harbor the simple wish of a safe and financially secure future for their children.
It was said we could never work together.
We must cut out more nonessential government spending and rout out more waste, and we will continue our efforts to reduce the number of employees in the Federal work force by 75,000.
Now that the essentials of that program are in place, our next major undertaking must be a program—just as bold, just as innovative—to make government again accountable to the people, to make our system of federalism work again.
I want to emphasize, however, that its full details will have been worked out only after close consultation with congressional, State, and local officials.
We just want to help them perform the good works they choose and help others to profit by their example.
Three hundred and eighty-five thousand corporations and private organizations are already working on social programs ranging from drug rehabilitation to job training, and thousands more Americans have written us asking how they can help.
Meanwhile, we're working for reduction of arms and military activities, as I announced in my address to the Nation last November 18th.
Just 2 weeks ago, in the midst of a terrible tragedy on the Potomac, we saw again the spirit of American heroism at its finest—the heroism of dedicated rescue workers saving crash victims from icy waters.
Let it be said of us that we, too, did not fail; that we, too, worked together to bring America through difficult times.
The very key to our success has been our ability, foremost among nations, to preserve our lasting values by making change work for us rather than against us.
For too many of our fellow citizens-farmers, steel and auto workers, lumbermen, black teenagers, working mothers-this is a painful period.
Through compromise and cooperation, the members of the Commission overcame their differences and achieved a fair, workable plan.
It asks for some sacrifice by all—the self-employed, beneficiaries, workers, government employees, and the better-off among the retired—but it imposes an undue burden on none.
We owe it to today's older Americans and today's younger workers.
We're witnessing an upsurge of productivity and impressive evidence that American industry will once again become competitive in markets at home and abroad, ensuring more jobs and better incomes for the Nation's work force.
No domestic challenge is more crucial than providing stable, permanent jobs for all Americans who want to work.
I'll propose extending unemployment benefits, including special incentives to employers who hire the long-term unemployed, providing programs for displaced workers, and helping federally funded and State-administered unemployment insurance programs provide workers with training and relocation assistance.
I hope we can work together on this.
I hope we can work together as we did last year in enacting the landmark Job Training Partnership Act.
So, I will propose a broader strategy in the field of international trade—one that increases the openness of our trading system and is fairer to America's farmers and workers in the world marketplace.
In the year ahead, we'll work to strengthen enforcement of fair housing laws for all Americans.
Meanwhile, I have instructed the Department of Agriculture to work individually with farmers with debt problems to help them through these tough times.
Over the past year, our Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives has successfully forged a working partnership involving leaders of business, labor, education, and government to address the training needs of American workers.
Thanks to the Task Force, private sector initiatives are now underway in all 50 States of the Union, and thousands of working people have been helped in making the shift from dead-end jobs and low-demand skills to the growth areas of high technology and the service economy.
The new advisory council on private sector initiatives will carry on and extend this vital work of encouraging private initiative in 1983.
During the next several weeks, I will send to the Congress a series of detailed proposals on these and other topics and look forward to working with you on the development of these initiatives.
But in almost every home and workplace in America, we're already witnessing reason for great hope—the first flowering of the manmade miracles of high technology, a field pioneered and still led by our country.
We will continue to work closely with the industrialized democracies of Europe and Japan and with the International Monetary Fund to ensure it has adequate resources to help bring the world economy back to strong, noninflationary growth.
Millions of our neighbors are without work.
And they've already begun the building, the research, the work, and the giving that will make our country great again.
If we do that, if we care what our children and our children's children will say of us, if we want them one day to be thankful for what we did here in these temples of freedom, we will work together to make America better for our having been here-not just in this year or this decade but in the next century and beyond.
Families felt helpless in the face of mounting inflation and the indignity of taxes that reduced reward for hard work, thrift, and risktaking.
The prime rate has been cut almost in half, and we must work together to bring it down even more.
Today a working family earning $25,000 has $1,100 more in purchasing power than if tax and inflation rates were still at the 1980 levels.
But we know that many of our fellow countrymen are still out of work, wondering what will come of their hopes and dreams.
We're seeing rededication to bedrock values of faith, family, work, neighborhood, peace, and freedom—values that help bring us together as one people, from the youngest child to the most senior citizen.
Under the leadership of Vice President Bush, we have reduced the growth of Federal regulations by more than 25 percent and cut well over 300 million hours of government-required paperwork each year.
In addition, we could examine the possibility of achieving further outlay savings based on the work of the Grace commission.
It works in 43 States.
Let's put it to work in Washington for all the people.
Our progress in space—taking giant steps for all mankind—is a tribute to American teamwork and excellence.
We can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic, and scientific gain.
For us, faith, work, family, neighborhood, freedom, and peace are not just words; they're expressions of what America means, definitions of what makes us a good and loving people.
Opportunities for all Americans will increase if we move forward in fair housing and work to ensure women's rights, provide for equitable treatment in pension benefits and Individual Retirement Accounts, facilitate child care, and enforce delinquent parent support payments.
It's not just the home but the workplace and community that sustain our values and shape our future.
And our vision of a better life for farmers, merchants, and working people, from the Americas to Asia, begins with a simple premise: The future is best decided by ballots, not bullets.
The wisdom of our bipartisan cooperation was seen in the work of the Scowcroft commission, which strengthened our ability to deter war and protect peace.
We'll work with our trading partners for a new round of negotiations in support of freer world trade, greater competition, and more open markets.
Today in Minnesota, he works 80 hours a week without pay, helping pioneer the field of computer-controlled walking.
Our progress began not in Washington, DC, but in the hearts of our families, communities, workplaces, and voluntary groups which, together, are unleashing the invincible spirit of one great nation under God.
New freedom in our lives has planted the rich seeds for future success:    For an America of wisdom that honors the family, knowing that if [as] the family goes, so goes our civilization;    For an America of vision that sees tomorrow's dreams in the learning and hard work we do today;    For an America of courage whose service men and women, even as we meet, proudly stand watch on the frontiers of freedom;    For an America of compassion that opens its heart to those who cry out for help.
We're here to speak for the American farmer, the entrepreneur, and every worker in industries fighting to modernize and compete.
Our automobile industry has overhauled assembly lines, increased worker productivity, and is competitive once again.
And tonight, I am instructing Treasury Secretary James Baker—I have to get used to saying that—to begin working with congressional authors and committees for bipartisan legislation conforming to these principles.
We can help teenagers, who have the highest unemployment rate, find summer jobs, so they can know the pride of work and have confidence in their futures.
Credits in education and health care vouchers will help working families shop for services that they need.
Now we're going to develop a permanently manned space station and new opportunities for free enterprise, because in the next decade Americans and our friends around the world will be living and working together in space.
Of all the changes that have swept America the past 4 years, none brings greater promise than our rediscovery of the values of faith, freedom, family, work, and neighborhood.
We've rediscovered that work is good in and of itself, that it ennobles us to create and contribute no matter how seemingly humble our jobs.
We're stressing basics of discipline, rigorous testing, and homework, while helping children become computer-smart as well.
We must go forward in our commitment to the new basics, giving parents greater authority and making sure good teachers are rewarded for hard work and achievement through merit pay.
Our security assistance programs help friendly governments defend themselves and give them confidence to work for peace.
I want to work with you to support the democratic forces whose struggle is tied to our own security.
[Applause]    I have come to review with you the progress of our nation, to speak of unfinished work, and to set our sights on the future.
Tonight the American people deserve our thanks for 37 straight months of economic growth, for sunrise firms and modernized industries creating 9 million new jobs in 3 years, interest rates cut in half, inflation falling over from 12 percent in 1980 to under 4 today, and a mighty river of good works-a record $74 billion in voluntary giving just last year alone.
Teddy Roosevelt said that a nation that does great work lives forever.
It doesn't work.
Before we leave this city, let's you and I work together to fix it, and then we can finally give the American people a balanced budget.
How often we read of a husband and wife both working, struggling from paycheck to paycheck to raise a family, meet a mortgage, pay their taxes and bills.
But we must revise or replace programs enacted in the name of compassion that degrade the moral worth of work, encourage family breakups, and drive entire communities into a bleak and heartless dependency.
And you can sustain or override my veto; that's the way the system should work.
We will also oppose legislation touted as providing protection that in reality pits one American worker against another, one industry against another, one community against another, and that raises prices for us all.
As we work to make the American dream real for all, we must also look to the condition of America's families.
Otis Bowen, to report to me by year end with recommendations on how the private sector and government can work together to address the problems of affordable insurance for those whose life savings would otherwise be threatened when catastrophic illness strikes.
We strengthen the family of freedom every time we work with allies and come to the aid of friends under siege.
And as long as it's real, work of noble note will yet be done, work that could reduce the harmful effects of x rays on patients and enable astronomers to view the golden gateways of the farthest stars.
So, now it's up to us, all of us, to prepare America for that day when our work will pale before the greatness of America's champions in the 21st century.
Let's roll up our sleeves and go to work and put America's economic engine at full throttle.
It did not work, and for that I assume full responsibility.
We will work to expand our opportunities in international markets through the Uruguay round of trade negotiations and to complete an historic free trade arrangement between the world's two largest trading partners, Canada and the United States.
Let's go to work and get this done together.
But let us work to see how many can be freed from the dependency of welfare and made self-supporting, which the great majority of welfare recipients want more than anything else.
The quest for excellence into the 21st century begins in the schoolroom but must go next to the workplace.
More than 20 million new jobs will be created before the new century unfolds, and by then, our economy should be able to provide a job for everyone who wants to work.
We must also enable our workers to adapt to the rapidly changing nature of the workplace.
Over the next few weeks, I'll be sending the Congress a complete series of these special messages—on budget reform, welfare reform, competitiveness, including education, trade, worker training and assistance, agriculture, and other subjects.
The Congress can give us these tools, but to make these tools work, it really comes down to just being our best.
We meet here tonight in this historic Chamber to continue that work.
So, my message to you tonight is put on your work shoes; we're still on the job.
[Laughter] Well, these ideas were part of a larger notion, a vision, if you will, of America herself—an America not only rich in opportunity for the individual but an America, too, of strong families and vibrant neighborhoods; an America whose divergent but harmonizing communities were a reflection of a deeper community of values: the value of work, of family, of religion, and of the love of freedom that God places in each of us and whose defense He has entrusted in a special way to this nation.
Let's prove to them and to ourselves that democracy works even in an election year.
And as we have worked together to bring down spending, tax rates, and inflation, employment has climbed to record heights; America has created more jobs and better, higher paying jobs; family income has risen for 4 straight years, and America's poor climbed out of poverty at the fastest rate in more than 10 years.
Our record is not just the longest peacetime expansion in history but an economic and social revolution of hope based on work, incentives, growth, and opportunity; a revolution of compassion that led to private sector initiatives and a 77-percent increase in charitable giving; a revolution that at a critical moment in world history reclaimed and restored the American dream.
And if we will work together this year, I believe we can give a future President and a future Congress the chance to make that prosperity, that peace, that freedom not just the state of our Union but the state of our world.
I mean schools that work, economic independence for the poor, restoring respect for family life and family values.
Let's get the people's work done in time to avoid a footrace with Santa Claus.
There's a lesson here that we all should write on the blackboard a hundred times: In a child's education, money can never take the place of basics like discipline, hard work, and, yes, homework.
They've demonstrated that successful welfare programs can be built around more effective child support enforcement practices and innovative programs requiring welfare recipients to work or prepare for work.
I pledge to you tonight I will work to remove barriers to adoption and extend full sharing in family life to millions of Americans so that children who need homes can be welcomed to families who want them and love them.
Yet if the Congress and the administration work together, even greater opportunities lie ahead to expand a growing world economy, to continue to reduce the threat of nuclear arms, and to extend the frontiers of freedom and the growth of democratic institutions.
Yet even as we work to expand world freedom, we must build a safer peace and reduce the danger of nuclear war.
And 8 years ago, I sat in that very chair as President Reagan spoke of punishing inflation and devastatingly high interest rates and people out of work -- American confidence on the wane.
I make this pledge tonight: My team and I are ready to work with the Congress, to form a special leadership group, to negotiate in good faith, to work day and night -- if that's what it takes -- to meet the budget targets and to produce a budget on time.
And I will work for choice for American families, whether in the housing in which they live, the schools to which they send their children, or the child care they select for their young.
And I will work to knock down the barriers left by past discrimination and to build a more tolerant society that will stop such barriers from ever being built again.
I believe we should help working families cope with the burden of child care.
We will not miss any opportunity to work for peace.
And I'll work to strengthen the hand of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Our diplomacy must work every day against the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
To those men and women in business, remember the ultimate end of your work: to make a better product, to create better lives.
We will work with you to open foreign markets to American agricultural products.
Check on the homework, go to the school, meet the teachers, care about what is happening there.
We need your talents in America's work force.
At a workers' rally, in a place called Branik on the outskirts of Prague, the idea called America is alive.
A worker, dressed in grimy overalls, rises to speak at the factory gates.
And our challenge today is to take this democratic system of ours, a system second to none, and make it better: a better America, where there's a job for everyone who wants one; where women working outside the home can be confident their children are in safe and loving care and where government works to expand child-care alternatives for parents; where we reconcile the needs of a clean environment and a strong economy; where "Made in the USA" is recognized around the world as the symbol of quality and progress; where every one of us enjoys the same opportunities to live, to work, and to contribute to society and where, for the first time, the American mainstream includes all of our disabled citizens; where everyone has a roof over his head and where the homeless get the help they need to live in dignity; where our schools challenge and support our kids and our teachers and where all of them make the grade; where every street, every city, every school, and every child is drug-free; and finally, where no American is forgotten -- our hearts go out to our hostages who are ceaselessly on our minds and in our efforts.
This administration is determined to encourage the creation of capital, capital of all kinds: physical capital -- everything from our farms and factories to our workshops and production lines, all that is needed to produce and deliver quality goods and quality services; intellectual capital -- the source of ideas that spark tomorrow's products; and of course our human capital -- the talented work force that we'll need to compete in the global market.
Let me tell you, if we ignore human capital, if we lose the spirit of American ingenuity, the spirit that is the hallmark of the American worker, that would be bad.
The American worker is the most productive worker in the world.
Every American adult must be a skilled, literate worker and citizen.
There is work to do, and they sent us here to get it done.
Let's work together to do the will of the people: clean air, child care, the Educational Excellence Act, crime, and drugs.
We've got to take the time after a busy day to sit down and read with our kids, help them with their homework, pass along the values we learned as children.
Six months ago, early in this season of change, I stood at the gates of the Gdansk shipyard in Poland at the monument to the fallen workers of Solidarity.
For two centuries, we've done the hard work of freedom.
Tonight, we work to achieve another victory, a victory over tyranny and savage aggression.
We are Americans; we have a unique responsibility to do the hard work of freedom.
And when we do, freedom works.
Do the hard work of freedom.
You and I know that if the playing field is level, America's workers and farmers can out-work, out-produce anyone, anytime, anywhere.
Working with Congress and the Governors, I propose we select at least $15 billion in such programs and turn them over to the States in a single consolidated grant, fully funded, for flexible management by the States.
There is no one more devoted, more committed to the hard work of freedom than every soldier and sailor, every marine, airman, and coastguardsman, every man and woman now serving in the Persian Gulf.
We worked hard to avoid war.
Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar; Presidents Gorbachev, Mitterrand, Ozal, Mubarak, and Bendjedid; Kings Fahd and Hassan; Prime Ministers Major and Andreotti -- just to name a few -- all worked for a solution.
The quality of American technology, thanks to the American worker, has enabled us to successfully deal with difficult military conditions and help minimize precious loss of life.
Our people have never wanted to abandon the blessings of home and work for distant lands and deadly conflict.
We move toward the next century more confident than ever that we have the will at home and abroad to do what must be done -- the hard work of freedom.
Further, for the untold number of hard-working, responsible American workers and business men and women who've been forced to go without needed bank loans, the banking credit crunch must end.
Finally, working with the Federal Reserve, we will continue to support monetary policy that keeps both interest rates and inflation down.
This will encourage businesses to accelerate investment and bring people back to work.
Once building starts, carpenters and plumbers work; people buy homes and take out mortgages.
First, trade: We will work to break down the walls that stop world trade.
We will work to open markets everywhere.
And in our major trade negotiations, I will continue pushing to eliminate tariffs and subsidies that damage America's farmers and workers.
The workplace of the future will demand more highly skilled workers than ever, more people who are computer-literate, highly educated.
Surely a tired woman on her way to work at 6 in the morning on a subway deserves the right to get there safely.
States throughout the country are beginning to operate with new assumptions that when able-bodied people receive Government assistance, they have responsibilities to the taxpayer: A responsibility to seek work, education, or job training; a responsibility to get their lives in order; a responsibility to hold their families together and refrain from having children out of wedlock; and a responsibility to obey the law.
I want to add, as we make these changes, we work together to improve this system, that our intention is not scapegoating or finger-pointing.
Someone even said our workers are lazy and uninspired.
I believe we will find our new direction in the basic old values that brought us here over the last two centuries: a commitment to opportunity, to individual responsibility, to community, to work, to family, and to faith.
Second, it changes the rhetoric of the past into the actions of the present by honoring work and families in every part of our public decision-making.
And there's no recovery worth its salt that doesn't put the American people back to work.
To create jobs and guarantee a strong recovery, I call on Congress to enact an immediate package of jobs investments of over $30 billion to put people to work now, to create a half a million jobs: jobs to rebuild our highways and airports, to renovate housing, to bring new life to rural communities, and spread hope and opportunity among our Nation's youth.
Our plan is designed, furthermore, and perhaps in some ways most importantly, to improve the health of American business through lower interest rates, more incentives to invest, and better trained workers.
That's about 90 percent of the firms in America, employing about 40 percent of the work force but creating a big majority of the net new jobs for more than a decade.
With a new network of community development banks and $1 billion to make the dream of enterprise zones real, we propose to bring new hope and new jobs to storefronts and factories from south Boston to south Texas to south central Los Angeles.
And it provides the most ambitious environmental cleanup in partnership with State and local government of our time, to put people to work and to preserve the environment for our future.
And so, we will insist on fair trade rules in international markets as a part of a national economic strategy to expand trade, including the successful completion of the latest round of world trade talks and the successful completion of a North American Free Trade Agreement with appropriate safeguards for our workers and for the environment.
We must provide special assistance to areas and to workers displaced by cuts in the defense budget and by other unavoidable economic dislocations.
I pledge to you that I will do my best to see that business and labor and Government work together for a change.
Later this spring, after the First Lady and the many good people who are helping her all across the country complete their work, I will deliver to Congress a comprehensive plan for health care reform that finally will bring costs under control and provide security to all of our families, so that no one will be denied the coverage they need but so that our economic future will not be compromised either.
We'll have to root out fraud and overcharges and make sure that paperwork no longer chokes your doctor.
Let me further say that I want to work with all of you on this.
And I will work to do better.
Yes, we must give them the resources they need to meet high standards, but we must also use the authority and the influence and the funding of the Education Department to promote strategies that really work in learning.
We have to do what really works to increase learning in our schools.
Lifelong learning must benefit not just young high school graduates but workers, too, throughout their career.
We have done a lot in this country on worker training in the last few years, but the system is too fractured.
We must develop a unified, simplified, sensible, streamlined worker-training program so that workers receive the training they need regardless of why they lost their jobs or whether they simply need to learn something new to keep them.
And finally, I propose a program that got a great response from the American people all across this country last year: a program of national service to make college loans available to all Americans and to challenge them at the same time to give something back to their country as teachers or police officers or community service workers; to give them the option to pay the loans back, but at tax time so they can't beat the bill, but to encourage them instead to pay it back by making their country stronger and making their country better and giving us the benefit of their knowledge.
If we believe in jobs and we believe in learning, we must believe in rewarding work.
If we believe in restoring the values that make America special, we must believe that there is dignity in all work, and there must be dignity for all workers.
We will reward the work of millions of working poor Americans by realizing the principle that if you work 40 hours a week and you've got a child in the house, you will no longer be in poverty.
I have worked on this issue for the better part of a decade.
I want to offer the people on welfare the education, the training, the child care, the health care they need to get back on their feet, but say after 2 years they must get back to work, too, in private business if possible, in public service if necessary.
We must begin again to make Government work for ordinary taxpayers, not simply for organized interest groups.
Finally, let me say to my friends on both sides of the aisle, it is not enough simply to cut Government; we have to rethink the whole way it works.
When I became President I was amazed at just the way the White House worked, in ways that added lots of money to what taxpayers had to pay, outmoded ways that didn't take maximum advantage of technology and didn't do things that any business would have done years ago to save taxpayers' money.
Some things work, and some things don't.
We ought to be subsidizing the things that work and discouraging the things that don't.
We cut the deficit so that our children will be able to buy a home, so that our companies can invest in the future and in retraining their workers, so that our Government can make the kinds of investments we need to be a stronger and smarter and safer nation.
Unlike a carbon tax, that's not too hard on the coal States; unlike a gas tax, that's not too tough on people who drive a long way to work; unlike an ad valorem tax, it doesn't increase just when the price of an energy source goes up.
Our people will be watching and wondering, not to see whether you disagree with me on a particular issue but just to see whether this is going to be business as usual or a real new day, whether we're all going to conduct ourselves as if we know we're working for them.
If we work hard and if we work together, if we rededicate ourselves to creating jobs, to rewarding work, to strengthening our families, to reinventing our Government, we can lift our country's fortunes again.
For 20 years, the wages of working people have been stagnant or declining.
For too many families, even when both parents were working, the American dream has been slipping away.
And I want to thank every one of you here who heard the American people, who broke gridlock, who gave them the most successful teamwork between a President and a Congress in 30 years.
This Congress produced tax relief for millions of low-income workers to reward work over welfare.
Though we are making a difference, our work has just begun.
And so tonight, let us resolve to continue the journey of renewal, to create more and better jobs, to guarantee health security for all, to reward work over welfare, to promote democracy abroad, and to begin to reclaim our streets from violent crime and drugs and gangs, to renew our own American community.
Of course, there were, as there always are in politics, naysayers who said this plan wouldn't work.
And the Vice President is right, we must also work with the private sector to connect every classroom, every clinic, every library, every hospital in America into a national information superhighway by the year 2000.
But we all know, too, we can do all these things—put our economic house in order, expand world trade, target the jobs of the future, guarantee equal opportunity—but if we're honest we'll all admit that this strategy still cannot work unless we also give our people the education, training, and skills they need to seize the opportunities of tomorrow.
Our school-to-work initiative will for the first time link school to the world of work, providing at least one year of apprenticeship beyond high school.
So we've got to streamline today's patchwork of training programs and make them a source of new skills for our people who lose their jobs.
It doesn't work.
If we value work, we can't justify a system that makes welfare more attractive than work if people are worried about losing their health care.
I worked on this problem for years before I became President, with other Governors and with Members of Congress of both parties and with the previous administration of another party.
I worked on it with people who were on welfare, lots of them.
They want to go back to work.
I once had a hearing when I was a Governor, and I brought in people on welfare from all over America who had found their way to work.
Instead of taxing people with modest incomes into poverty, we helped them to work their way out of poverty by dramatically increasing the earned-income tax credit.
It will lift 15 million working families out of poverty, rewarding work over welfare, making it possible for people to be successful workers and successful parents.
This spring I will send you a comprehensive welfare reform bill that builds on the Family Support Act of 1988 and restores the basic values of work and responsibility.
But after that, anyone who can work, must, in the private sector wherever possible, in community service if necessary.
No wonder people leave work and go back to welfare to get health care coverage.
Although Judy recovered and Richard went back to work at $8 an hour, the bills were too much for them, and they were literally forced into bankruptcy.
It was to help the Richard and Judy Andersons of America that the First Lady and so many others have worked so hard and so long on this health care reform issue.
Every year doctors and nurses spend more time on paperwork and less time with patients because of the absolute bureaucratic nightmare the present system has become.
It means every morning millions of Americans go to work without any health insurance at all, something the workers in no other advanced country in the world do.
It means that every year more and more hard-working people are told to pick a new doctor because their boss has had to pick a new plan.
It builds on what works today in the private sector, to expand employer-based coverage, to guarantee private insurance for every American.
To those who would cut Medicare without protecting seniors, I say the solution to today's squeeze on middle class working people's health care is not to put the squeeze on middle class retired people's health care.
We must all work together to stop the violence that explodes our emergency rooms.
Now, in the coming months I hope very much to work with both Democrats and Republicans to reform a health care system by using the market to bring down costs and to achieve lasting health security.
The work of change, frankly, will never get any easier until we limit the influence of well-financed interests who profit from this current system.
I think we need to give every hard-working, tax-paying American the same health care security they have already given to us.
We worked to promote environmentally sustainable economic growth.
We are working to achieve a Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons.
That is why I went to Europe earlier this month, to work with our European partners, to help to integrate all the former Communist countries into a Europe that has a possibility of becoming unified for the first time in its entire history, its entire history, based on the simple commitments of all nations in Europe to democracy, to free markets, and to respect for existing borders.
With our allies we have created a Partnership For Peace that invites states from the former Soviet bloc and other non-NATO members to work with NATO in military cooperation.
We will continue standing by South Africa as it works its way through its bold and hopeful and difficult transition to democracy.
We will also work for new progress toward the Middle East peace.
And this year, because of our work together, enacting NAFTA, keeping our military strong and prepared, supporting democracy abroad, we have reaffirmed America's leadership, America's engagement.
We know right now that police who work the streets, know the folks, have the respect of the neighborhood kids, focus on high crime areas, we know that they are more likely to prevent crime as well as catch criminals.
[Applause]    You will be given a chance to give the children of this country, the law-abiding working people of this country—and don't forget, in the toughest neighborhoods in this country, in the highest crime neighborhoods in this country, the vast majority of people get up every day and obey the law, pay their taxes, do their best to raise their kids.
In our toughest neighborhoods, on our meanest streets, in our poorest rural areas, we have seen a stunning and simultaneous breakdown of community, family, and work, the heart and soul of civilized society.
Many of our initiatives, from job training to welfare reform to health care to national service, will help to rebuild distressed communities, to strengthen families, to provide work.
They're rooted in the loss of values, in the disappearance of work, and the breakdown of our families and our communities.
The American people have got to want to change from within if we're going to bring back work and family and community.
We can't renew our country unless more of us—I mean, all of us— are willing to join the churches and the other good citizens, people like all the—like ministers I've worked with over the years or the priests and the nuns I met at Our Lady of Help in east Los Angeles or my good friend Tony Campollo in Philadelphia, unless we're willing to work with people like that, people who are saving kids, adopting schools, making streets safer.
Parents who know their children's teachers and turn off the television and help with the homework and teach their kids right from wrong, those kinds of parents can make all the difference.
And here we have worked to bring the deficit down, to expand trade, to put more police on our streets, to give our citizens more of the tools they need to get an education and to rebuild their own communities.
While our Nation is enjoying peace and prosperity, too many of our people are still working harder and harder, for less and less.
Citizens are working together less and shouting at each other more.
That approach worked in its time.
Our New Covenant is a new set of understandings for how we can equip our people to meet the challenges of a new economy, how we can change the way our Government works to fit a different time, and, above all, how we can repair the damaged bonds in our society and come together behind our common purpose.
But we have a lot more to do before people really trust the way things work around here.
The American people look at their Capital, and they see a city where the well-connected and the well-protected can work the system, but the interests of ordinary citizens are often left out.
We should require lobbyists to tell the people for whom they work what they're spending, what they want.
And as I have said for 3 years, we should work to open the airwaves so that they can be an instrument of democracy, not a weapon of destruction, by giving free TV time to candidates for public office.
More important, I think we all agree that we have to change the way the Government works.
And the Government is working better in important ways: FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, has gone from being a disaster to helping people in disasters.
Government workers, working hand in hand with private business, rebuilt southern California's fractured freeways in record time and under budget.
University administrators all over the country have told me that they are saving weeks and weeks of bureaucratic time now because of our direct college loan program, which makes college loans cheaper and more affordable with better repayment terms for students, costs the Government less, and cuts out paperwork and bureaucracy for the Government and for the universities.
And we're working on getting rid of unnecessary regulations and making them more sensible.
I know there are still serious differences over the details of the unfunded mandates legislation, but I want to work with you to make sure we pass a reasonable bill which will protect the national interests and give justified relief where we need to give it.
There was a $1 million to study stress in plants and $12 million for a tick removal program that didn't work.
But when we deregulate, let's remember what national action in the national interest has given us: safer food for our families, safer toys for our children, safer nursing homes for our parents, safer cars and highways, and safer workplaces, cleaner air, and cleaner water.
It rewards welfare over work.
I've worked on this problem for a long time, nearly 15 years now.
As a Governor, I had the honor of working with the Reagan administration to write the last welfare reform bill back in 1988.
In the last 2 years, we made a good start at continuing the work of welfare reform.
Our administration gave two dozen States the right to slash through Federal rules and regulations to reform their own welfare systems and to try to promote work and responsibility over welfare and dependency.
We have to help those on welfare move to work as quickly as possible, to provide child care and teach them skills, if that's what they need, for up to 2 years.
And after that, there ought to be a simple, hard rule: Anyone who can work must go to work.
We should suspend drivers' license, track them across State lines, make them work off what they owe.
I want to work with you, with all of you, to pass welfare reform.
But our goal must be to liberate people and lift them up from dependence to independence, from welfare to work, from mere childbearing to responsible parenting.
We should, we should require work and mutual responsibility.
And I am telling you, the people who are trapped on it know it doesn't work; they also want to get off.
So we can promote, together, education and work and good parenting.
I have no problem with punishing bad behavior or the refusal to be a worker or a student or a responsible parent.
And America's best example of that may be Lynn Woolsey, who worked her way off welfare to become a Congresswoman from the State of California.
But let's not go back on the things that we did last year that we know work, that we know work because the local law enforcement officers tell us that we did the right thing, because local community leaders who have worked for years and years to lower the crime rate tell us that they work.
We've got 4 more hard years of work to do to do that.
And now there are 20,000 Americans, more than ever served in one year in the Peace Corps, working all over this country, helping people person-to-person in local grassroots volunteer groups, solving problems, and in the process earning some money for their education.
In the budget I will present to you, we will try to do more to speed the deportation of illegal aliens who are arrested for crimes, to better identify illegal aliens in the workplace as recommended by the commission headed by former Congresswoman Barbara Jordan.
America has always been a land of opportunity, a land where, if you work hard, you can get ahead.
If we want it to stay that way, those who work and lift our Nation must have more of its benefits.
They're working harder for less.
If we don't act, our economy will probably keep doing what it's been doing since about 1978, when the income growth began to go to those at the very top of our economic scale and the people in the vast middle got very little growth, and people who worked like crazy but were on the bottom then fell even further and further behind in the years afterward, no matter how hard they worked.
We've got to have a Government that can be a real partner in making this new economy work for all of our people, a Government that helps each and every one of us to get an education and to have the opportunity to renew our skills.
That's why we worked so hard to increase educational opportunities in the last 2 years, from Head Start to public schools, to apprenticeships for young people who don't go to college, to making college loans more available and more affordable.
We took the first step in 1993 with a working family tax cut for 15 million families with incomes under $27,000, a tax cut that this year will average about $1,000 a family.
I have proposed the middle class bill of rights, which should properly be called the bill of rights and responsibilities because its provisions only benefit those who are working to educate and raise their children and to educate themselves.
And fourth, we should pass a "GI bill" for America's workers.
We propose to collapse nearly 70 Federal programs and not give the money to the States but give the money directly to the American people, offer vouchers to them so that they, if they're laid off or if they're working for a very low wage, can get a voucher worth $2,600 a year for up to 2 years to go to their local community colleges or wherever else they want to get the skills they need to improve their lives.
Let's empower people in this way, move it from the Government directly to the workers of America.
I really want to work with all of you.
It rewards work.
That's not my idea of how the new economy ought to work.
Members of Congress have been here less than a month, but by the end of the week, 28 days into the new year, every Member of Congress will have earned as much in congressional salary as a minimum wage worker makes all year long.
So I'm asking you that we work together.
I want to work together with all of you who have an interest in this, with the Democrats who worked on it last time, with the Republican leaders like Senator Dole, who has a longtime commitment to health care reform and made some constructive proposals in this area last year.
We can work to help workers who lose their jobs at least keep their health insurance coverage for a year while they look for work.
But we can't be proud of the fact that we're the only wealthy country in the world that has a smaller percentage of the work force and their children with health insurance today than we did 10 years ago, the last time we were the most productive economy in the world.
So let's work together on this.
The PTA, the town hall meeting, the ball park, it's hard for a lot of overworked parents to find the time and space for those things that strengthen the bonds of trust and cooperation.
We all know that while we here in this Chamber can make a difference on those things, that the real differences will be made by our fellow citizens, where they work and where they live and that it will be made almost without regard to party.
For our corporate and business leaders, we're going to work here to keep bringing the deficit down, to expand markets, to support their success in every possible way.
But they have an obligation when they're doing well to keep jobs in our communities and give their workers a fair share of the prosperity they generate.
But you do have a responsibility to assess the impact of your work and to understand the damage that comes from the incessant, repetitive, mindless violence and irresponsible conduct that permeates our media all the time.
I have sent to Congress a plan to target schools all over this country with antipregnancy programs that work.
I know it's hard when you're working harder for less, when you're under great stress, to do these things.
A lot of our people don't have the time or the emotional stress, they think, to do the work of citizenship.
If you go back to the beginning of this country, the great strength of America, as de Tocqueville pointed out when he came here a long time ago, has always been our ability to associate with people who were different from ourselves and to work together to find common ground.
He's been a national leader in using more police in community policing, and he's worked with AmeriCorps to do it.
This is the kind of work that citizens are doing in America.
While more Americans are living better, too many of our fellow citizens are working harder just to keep up, and they are rightly concerned about the security of their families.
We know, and we have worked to give the American people a smaller, less bureaucratic Government in Washington.
Instead, we must go forward as one America, one nation working together to meet the challenges we face together.
Self-reliance and teamwork are not opposing virtues; we must have both.
I believe our new, smaller Government must work in an old-fashioned American way, together with all of our citizens through State and local governments, in the workplace, in religious, charitable, and civic associations.
But these cuts do not undermine our fundamental obligations to our parents, our children, and our future by endangering Medicare or Medicaid or education or the environment or by raising taxes on working families.
I am willing to work to resolve them.
And when we work together to meet them, we never fail.
To make the V-chip work, I challenge the broadcast industry to do what movies have done, to identify your program in ways that help parents to protect their children.
And I invite the leaders of major media corporations in the entertainment industry to come to the White House next month to work with us in a positive way on concrete ways to improve what our children see on television.
I am ready to work with you.
I say to those who are on welfare, and especially to those who have been trapped on welfare for a long time: For too long our welfare system has undermined the values of family and work instead of supporting them.
We agree on time limits, tough work requirements, and the toughest possible child support enforcement.
But I believe we must also provide child care so that mothers who are required to go to work can do so without worrying about what is happening to their children.
I challenge this Congress to send me a bipartisan welfare reform bill that will really move people from welfare to work and do the right thing by our children.
The next step is to make it work.
I challenge American businesses to give people on welfare the chance to move into the work force.
I applaud the work of religious groups and others who care for the poor.
And I challenge America's families to work harder to stay together.
We are working with the telecommunications industry, educators, and parents to connect 20 percent of California's classrooms by this spring, and every classroom and every library in the entire United States by the year 2000.
See that the homework is done.
And we should also work hard to open the doors of college even wider.
I challenge Congress to expand work-study and help one million young Americans work their way through college by the year 2000, to provide a $1,000 merit scholarship for the top 5 percent of graduates in every high school in the United States, to expand Pell grant scholarships for deserving and needy students, and to make up to $10,000 a year of college tuition tax deductible.
Our third challenge is to help every American who is willing to work for it achieve economic security in this new age.
People who work hard still need support to get ahead in the new economy.
So I challenge Congress to consolidate 70 overlapping, antiquated job training programs into a simple voucher worth $2,600 for unemployed or underemployed workers to use as they please for community college tuition or other training.
This is a "GI bill" for America's workers we should all be able to agree on.
More and more Americans are working hard without a raise.
In 1993, Congress cut the taxes of 15 million hard-pressed working families to make sure that no parents who work full time would have to raise their children in poverty and to encourage people to move from welfare to work.
But I also agree that the people who are helped under this initiative are not all those in our country who are working hard to do a good job raising their children and at work.
I agree that we need a tax credit for working families with children.
Two years ago, with bipartisan support that was almost unanimous on both sides of the aisle, we moved to protect the pensions of 8 million working people and to stabilize the pensions of 32 million more.
Congress should not now let companies endanger those workers' pension funds.
Finally, if our working families are going to succeed in the new economy, they must be able to buy health insurance policies that they do not lose when they change jobs or when someone in their family gets sick.
Over the past 2 years, over one million Americans in working families have lost their health insurance.
And even as we enact savings in these programs, we must have a common commitment to preserve the basic protections of Medicare and Medicaid, not just to the poor but to people in working families, including children, people with disabilities, people with AIDS, senior citizens in nursing homes.
The "GI bill" for workers, tax relief for education and childrearing, pension availability and protection, access to health care, preservation of Medicare and Medicaid, these things, along with the Family and Medical Leave Act passed in 1993, these things will help responsible, hardworking American families to make the most of their own lives.
But employers and employees must do their part as well, as they are doing in so many of our finest companies, working together, putting the long-term prosperity ahead of the short-term gain.
As workers increase their hours and their productivity, employers should make sure they get the skills they need and share the benefits of the good years as well as the burdens of the bad ones.
When companies and workers work as a team they do better, and so does America.
This strategy, called community policing, is clearly working.
Let us stick with a strategy that's working and keep the crime rate coming down.
We can work together.
To communities we say, we must strengthen community right-toknow laws requiring polluters to disclose their emissions, but you have to use the information to work with business to cut pollution.
By keeping our military strong, by using diplomacy where we can and force where we must, by working with others to share the risk and the cost of our efforts, America is making a difference for people here and around the world.
Our seventh challenge is really America's challenge to those of us in this hallowed Hall tonight: to reinvent our Government and make our democracy work for them.
Our administration is working hard to give the American people a Government that works better and costs less.
Thanks to the work of Vice President Gore, we are eliminating 16,000 pages of unnecessary rules and regulations, shifting more decisionmaking out of Washington, back to States and local communities.
As we move into the era of balanced budgets and smaller Government, we must work in new ways to enable people to make the most of their own lives.
We should honor every legal immigrant here, working hard to be a good citizen, working hard to become a new citizen.
I want to say a special word now to those who work for our Federal Government.
Today the Federal work force is 200,000 employees smaller than it was the day I took office as President.
And there's a good reason—a good reason: The remaining Federal work force is composed of hard-working Americans who are now working harder and working smarter than ever before to make sure the quality of our services does not decline.
He's a 49-year-old Vietnam veteran who's worked for the Social Security Administration for 22 years now.
Last year he was hard at work in the Federal Building in Oklahoma City when the blast killed 169 people and brought the rubble down all around him.
And the second time the Government shut down he continued helping Social Security recipients, but he was working without pay.
On behalf of Richard Dean and his family, and all the other people who are out there working every day doing a good job for the American people, I challenge all of you in this Chamber: Let's never, ever shut the Federal Government down again.
But I am confident: When Americans work together in their homes, their schools, their churches, their synagogues, their civic groups, their workplace, they can meet any challenge.
We have to go forward to the era of working together as a community, as a team, as one America, with all of us reaching across these lines that divide us—the division, the discrimination, the rancor—we have to reach across it to find common ground.
We have got to work together if we want America to work.
The new promise of the global economy, the information age, unimagined new work, life-enhancing technology, all these are ours to seize.
So tonight I issue a call to action: action by this Congress, action by our States, by our people, to prepare America for the 21st century; action to keep our economy and our democracy strong and working for all our people; action to strengthen education and harness the forces of technology and science; action to build stronger families and stronger communities and a safer environment; action to keep America the world's strongest force for peace, freedom, and prosperity; and above all, action to build a more perfect Union here at home.
The spirit we bring to our work will make all the difference.
And we must work together.
It will balance the budget and build on the Vice President's efforts to make our Government work better, even as it costs less.
Let's work together to write bipartisan campaign finance reform into law and pass McCain-Feingold by the day we celebrate the birth of our democracy, July the fourth.
Then last year, Congress enacted landmark welfare reform legislation, demanding that all able-bodied recipients assume the responsibility of moving from welfare to work.
Now each and every one of us has to fulfill our responsibility, indeed, our moral obligation, to make sure that people who now must work, can work.
Here is my plan: Tax credits and other incentives for businesses that hire people off welfare; incentives for job placement firms and States to create more jobs for welfare recipients; training, transportation, and child care to help people go to work.
Give someone on welfare the chance to go to work.
Tonight I am pleased to announce that five major corporations, Sprint, Monsanto, UPS, Burger King, and United Airlines, will be the first to join in a new national effort to marshal America's businesses, large and small, to create jobs so that people can move from welfare to work.
And we must join together to do something else, too, something both Republican and Democratic Governors have asked us to do, to restore basic health and disability benefits when misfortune strikes immigrants who came to this country legally, who work hard, pay taxes, and obey the law.
Let's work together to meet these three goals: Every 8-year-old must be able to read; every 12-year-old must be able to log on to the Internet; every 18-year-old must be able to go to college; and every adult American must be able to keep on learning for a lifetime.
For years, many of our educators, led by North Carolina's Governor Jim Hunt and the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, have worked very hard to establish nationally accepted credentials for excellence in teaching.
We want at least 100,000 college students to help, and tonight I am pleased that 60 college presidents have answered my call, pledging that thousands of their work-study students will serve for one year as reading tutors.
I ask you to pass it and give every American who works hard the chance to go to college.
My "GI bill" for America's workers will transform the confusing tangle of Federal training programs into a simple skill grant to go directly into eligible workers' hands.
Let's give more of our workers the ability to learn and to earn for a lifetime.
We must build the second generation of the Internet so that our leading universities and national laboratories can communicate in speeds 1,000 times faster than today, to develop new medical treatments, new sources of energy, new ways of working together.
With new resources, NIH will now become the most powerful discovery engine for an AIDS vaccine, working with other scientists to finally end the threat of AIDS.
With new pressures on people in the way they work and live, I believe we must expand family leave so that workers can take time off for teacher conferences and a child's medical checkup.
We should pass flextime, so workers can choose to be paid for overtime in income or trade it in for time off to be with their families.
Ten million children still lack health insurance; 80 percent of them have working parents who pay taxes.
We should expand the network of community development banks.
And together we must pledge tonight that we will use this empowerment approach, including private-sector tax incentives, to renew our Capital City, so that Washington is a great place to work and live and once again the proud face America shows the world.
We must also protect our global environment, working to ban the worst toxic chemicals and to reduce the greenhouse gases that challenge our health even as they change our climate.
Our national service program, AmeriCorps, has already helped 70,000 young people to work their way through college as they serve America.
We should challenge all Americans in the arts and humanities to join with our fellow citizens to make the year 2000 a national celebration of the American spirit in every community, a celebration of our common culture in the century that has passed and in the new one to come in the new millennium, so that we can remain the world's beacon not only of liberty but of creativity long after the fireworks have faded.
I will go to China, and I have invited China's President to come here, not because we agree on everything but because engaging China is the best way to work on our common challenges like ending nuclear testing and to deal frankly with our fundamental differences like human rights.
We've worked hard to tear down trade barriers abroad so that we can create good jobs at home.
After all, we have the best workers and the best products.
We are working with other nations with renewed intensity to fight drug traffickers and to stop terrorists before they act and hold them fully accountable if they do.
He's the proud son of two of the millions of Asian-American immigrants who have strengthened America with their hard work, family values, and good citizenship.
Tomorrow there will be just over 1,000 days until the year 2000; 1,000 days to prepare our people; 1,000 days to work together; 1,000 days to build a bridge to a land of new promise.
My fellow Americans, we have work to do.
Because of the hard work and high purpose of the American people, these are good times for America.
It is a time to build, to build the America within reach, an America where everybody has a chance to get ahead with hard work; where every citizen can live in a safe community; where families are strong, schools are good, and all our young people can go on to college; an America where scientists find cures for diseases from diabetes to Alzheimer's to AIDS; an America where every child can stretch a hand across a keyboard and reach every book ever written, every painting ever painted, every symphony ever composed; where government provides opportunity and citizens honor the responsibility to give something back to their communities; an America which leads the world to new heights of peace and prosperity.
This is the America we have begun to build; this is the America we can leave to our children if we join together to finish the work at hand.
First, Americans in this Chamber and across our Nation have pursued a new strategy for prosperity: fiscal discipline to cut interest rates and spur growth; investments in education and skills, in science and technology and transportation, to prepare our people for the new economy; new markets for American products and American workers.
It is the product of hard work by the American people and of two visionary actions in Congress: the courageous vote in 1993 that led to a cut in the deficit of 90 percent, and the truly historic bipartisan balanced budget agreement passed by this Congress.
My plan to balance the budget next year includes both new investments and new tax cuts targeted to the needs of working families, for education, for child care, for the environment.
Because these times are good, we can afford to take one simple, sensible step to help millions of workers struggling to provide for their families: We should raise the minimum wage.
Since then, this Congress—across party lines— and the American people have responded, in the most important year for education in a generation, expanding public school choice, opening the way to 3,000 new charter schools, working to connect every classroom in the country to the information superhighway, committing to expand Head Start to a million children, launching America Reads, sending literally thousands of college students into our elementary schools to make sure all our 8-year-olds can read.
When we promote a child from grade to grade who hasn't mastered the work, we don't do that child any favors.
I have listened carefully, and I believe that the opposition is rooted in two fears: first, that our trading partners will have lower environmental and labor standards which will give them an unfair advantage in our market and do their own people no favors, even if there's more business; and, second, that if we have more trade, more of our workers will lose their jobs and have to start over.
I think we should seek to advance worker and environmental standards around the world.
That's why we have more than doubled funding for training dislocated workers since 1993.
That's why we must do more, and more quickly, to help workers who lose their jobs for whatever reason.
Again, I ask the Congress to continue its bipartisan work to consolidate the tangle of training programs we have today into one single "GI bill" for workers, a simple skills grant so people can, on their own, move quickly to new jobs, to higher incomes, and brighter futures.
A society rooted in responsibility must first promote the value of work, not welfare.
She's saved enough money to move her family into a good neighborhood, and she's helping other welfare recipients go to work.
[Applause]    We still have a lot more to do, all of us, to make welfare reform a success—providing child care, helping families move closer to available jobs, challenging more companies to join our welfare-to-work partnership, increasing child support collections from deadbeat parents who have a duty to support their own children.
I also want to thank Congress for restoring some of the benefits to immigrants who are here legally and working hard, and I hope you will finish that job this year.
We have to make it possible for all hardworking families to meet their most important responsibilities.
After a lifetime of work, they are left with nowhere to turn.
So I ask the Congress, let these hardworking Americans buy into the Medicare system.
In the new economy, most parents work harder than ever.
They face a constant struggle to balance their obligations to be good workers and their even more important obligations to be good parents.
I ask you to extend that law to cover 10 million more workers and to give parents time off when they have to go see their children's teachers or take them to the doctor.
Child care is the next frontier we must face to enable people to succeed at home and at work.
So here's my plan: Help families to pay for child care for a million more children; scholarships and background checks for child care workers, and a new emphasis on early learning; tax credits for businesses that provide child care for their employees; and a larger child care tax credit for working families.
I can report to you tonight that it's working.
Police, prosecutors, and prevention programs, as good as they are, they can't work if our court system doesn't work.
By taking in new members and working closely with new partners, including Russia and Ukraine, NATO can help to assure that Europe is a stronghold for peace in the 21st century.
More and more, we are working with other nations to achieve common goals.
Under the leadership of Vice President Gore, we've reduced the Federal payroll by 300,000 workers, cut 16,000 pages of regulation, eliminated hundreds of programs, and improved the operations of virtually every Government agency.
For the past 5 years, we have worked to bring the spark of private enterprise to inner city and poor rural areas, with community development banks, more commercial loans in the poor neighborhoods, cleanup of polluted sites for development.
They are still the gateways for new immigrants from every continent, who come here to work for their own American dreams.
We must work together, learn together, live together, serve together.
I ask all Americans to support our project to restore all our treasures so that the generations of the 21st century can see for themselves the images and the words that are the old and continuing glory of America, an America that has continued to rise through every age, against every challenge, a people of great works and greater possibilities, who have always, always found the wisdom and strength to come together as one nation to widen the circle of opportunity, to deepen the meaning of our freedom, to form that more perfect Union.
Speaker, at your swearing-in, you asked us all to work together in a spirit of civility and bipartisanship.
Now, America is working again.
We must be willing to work in a bipartisan way and look at new ideas, including the upcoming report of the bipartisan Medicare Commission.
If we work together, we can secure Medicare for the next two decades and cover the greatest growing need of seniors, affordable prescription drugs.
Today we can say something we couldn't say 6 years ago: With tax credits and more affordable student loans, with more work-study grants and more Pell grants, with education IRA's and the new HOPE scholarship tax cut that more than 5 million Americans will receive this year, we have finally opened the doors of college to all Americans.
I believe we must change the way we invest that money, to support what works and to stop supporting what does not work.
Now, if you doubt this will work, just look at Chicago, which ended social promotion and made summer school mandatory for those who don't master the basics.
It will work, and we should do it.
Now, we also have to do more to support the millions of parents who give their all every day at home and at work.
And let's make sure that women and men get equal pay for equal work by strengthening enforcement of equal pay laws.
[Applause]    Working parents also need quality child care.
So again this year, I ask Congress to support our plan for tax credits and subsidies for working families, for improved safety and quality, for expanded after-school programs.
Parents should never have to worry about choosing between their children and their work.
I think it's time, with all the evidence that it has been so little burdensome to employers, to extend family leave to 10 million more Americans working for smaller companies.
Finally on the matter of work, parents should never have to face discrimination in the workplace.
So I want to ask Congress to prohibit companies from refusing to hire or promote workers simply because they have children.
And therefore, I especially ask you tonight to join hands to pass the landmark bipartisan legislation proposed by Senators Kennedy and Jeffords, Roth, and Moynihan to allow people with disabilities to keep their health insurance when they go to work.
We need to enable our public hospitals, our community, our university health centers to provide basic, affordable care for all the millions of working families who don't have any insurance.
Last year, the Congress passed a law enabling workers to get a skills grant to choose the training they need.
Also, I ask your support for a dramatic increase in Federal support for adult literacy, to mount a national campaign aimed at helping the millions and millions of working people who still read at less than a fifth grade level.
Tonight, our Welfare to Work Partnership includes 10,000 companies who have hired hundreds of thousands of people.
And our balanced budget will help another 200,000 people move to the dignity and pride of work.
We must work hard to help bring prosperity back to the family farm.
And I am ready to work with lawmakers of both parties to create a farm safety net that will include crop insurance reform and farm income assistance.
And we've been working hard on it.
But I want all the folks at home listening to this to know that we need every State and local government, every business, large and small, to work with us to make sure that this Y2K computer bug will be remembered as the last headache of the 20th century, not the first crisis of the 21st.
And while the turmoil is not over, we have worked very hard with other nations to contain it.
At the same time, we have to continue to work on the long-term project, building a global financial system for the 21st century that promotes prosperity and tames the cycle of boom and bust that has engulfed so much of Asia.
Somehow we have to find a common ground on which business and workers and environmentalists and farmers and Government can stand together.
But at the same time, we must ensure that ordinary citizens in all countries actually benefit from trade, a trade that promotes the dignity of work and the rights of workers and protects the environment.
Tonight I say we will work with the International Labor Organization on a new initiative to raise labor standards around the world.
As we work for peace, we must also meet threats to our Nation's security, including increased dangers from outlaw nations and terrorism.
We will defend our security wherever we are threatened, as we did this summer when we struck at Usama bin Ladin's network of terror.
So let's give them the support they need, the safest possible workplaces, and the resources they must have so America can continue to lead.
We must work to keep terrorists from disrupting computer networks.
We must work to prepare local communities for biological and chemical emergencies, to support research into vaccines and treatments.
We must expand our work with Russia, Ukraine, and other former Soviet nations to safeguard nuclear materials and technology so they never fall into the wrong hands.
The START II treaty and the framework we have already agreed to for START III could cut them by 80 percent from their cold war height.
America will continue to contain Saddam, and we will work for the day when Iraq has a Government worthy of its people.
I want to work with this new Congress to pay our dues and our debts.
We must continue to deepen our ties to the Americas and the Caribbean, our common work to educate children, fight drugs, strengthen democracy and increase trade.
Working with Congress, I am committed to help them rebuild.
In the Dominican Republic, Hillary helped to rededicate a hospital that had been rebuilt by Dominicans and Americans working side by side.
We were deeply moved by the courageous parents now working to keep guns out of the hands of children and to make other efforts so that other parents don't have to live through their loss.
And I want to work with Members of Congress in both parties to reward companies that take early, voluntary action to reduce greenhouse gases.
So far, in just 4 years, 100,000 young Americans have built low-income homes with Habitat for Humanity, helped to tutor children with churches, worked with FEMA to ease the burden of natural disasters, and performed countless other acts of service that have made America better.
Now, we must work to renew our national community as well for the 21st century.
Tonight, as I deliver the last State of the Union Address of the 20th century, no one anywhere in the world can doubt the enduring resolve and boundless capacity of the American people to work toward that "more perfect Union" of our Founders' dream.
My gratitude also goes to those of you in this Chamber who have worked with us to put progress over partisanship.
With the smallest Federal work force in 40 years, we turned record deficits into record surpluses and doubled our investment in education.
We ended welfare as we knew it, requiring work while protecting health care and nutrition for children and investing more in child care, transportation, and housing to help their parents go to work.
We've helped parents to succeed at home and at work with family leave, which 20 million Americans have now used to care for a newborn child or a sick loved one.
Every family will be able to succeed at home and at work, and no child will be raised in poverty.
Tonight I ask you to work with me to make a bipartisan downpayment on Social Security reform by crediting the interest savings from debt reduction to the Social Security Trust Fund so that it will be strong and sound for the next 50 years.
For 7 years now, we've worked hard to improve our schools, with opportunity and responsibility, investing more but demanding more in turn.
It is time to support what works and stop supporting what doesn't.
We also need a 21st century revolution to reward work and strengthen families by giving every parent the tools to succeed at work and at the most important work of all, raising children.
From my first days as President, we've worked to give families better access to better health care.
In 1997, we passed the Children's Health Insurance Program—CHIP—so that workers who don't have coverage through their employers at least can get it for their children.
We must also make investments that reward work and support families.
The "E" in the EITC is about earning, working, taking responsibility, and being rewarded for it.
Tonight I propose another major expansion of the EITC: to reduce the marriage penalty, to make sure it rewards marriage as it rewards work, and also to expand the tax credit for families that have more than two children.
These are working families; their children should not be in poverty.
We also can't reward work and family unless men and women get equal pay for equal work.
Many working parents spend up to a quarter—a quarter—of their income on child care.
You know, we all say we're pro-work and pro-family.
As hard as they work, they still don't have the opportunity to save.
We should do more to help all working families save and accumulate wealth.
And I propose to give a major new tax credit to any small business that will provide a meaningful pension to its workers.
If there is any single issue on which we should be able to reach across party lines, it is in our common commitment to reward work and strengthen families.
We came together to help people with disabilities keep their health insurance when they go to work.
Of course, I am forever grateful to the person who has led our efforts from the beginning and who's worked so tirelessly for children and families for 30 years now, my wife, Hillary, and I thank her.
If we take the steps just discussed, we can go a long, long way toward empowering parents to succeed at home and at work and ensuring that no child is raised in poverty.
We can make these vital investments in health care, education, support for working families, and still offer tax cuts to help pay for college, for retirement, to care for aging parents, to reduce the marriage penalty.
I ask responsible leaders in the gun industry to work with us on smart guns and other steps to keep guns out of the wrong hands, to keep our children safe.
Now, to keep our historic economic expansion going, the subject of a lot of discussion in this community and others, I believe we need a 21st century revolution to open new markets, start new businesses, hire new workers right here in America, in our inner cities, poor rural areas, and Native American reservations.
Everywhere I go, I meet talented people eager for opportunity and able to work.
Tonight I ask you, let's put them to work.
Speaker, it was a powerful moment last November when you joined Reverend Jesse Jackson and me in your home State of Illinois and committed to working toward our common goal by combining the best ideas from both sides of the aisle.
Speaker, I look forward to working with you.
And I want to thank tonight the leaders and the members from both parties who've expressed to me an interest in working with us on these efforts.
When I signed the farm bill in 1996, I said there was great danger it would work well in good times but not in bad.
We must work together to strengthen the farm safety net, invest in land conservation, and create some new markets for them by expanding our programs for bio-based fuels and products.
To realize the full possibilities of this economy, we must reach beyond our own borders to shape the revolution that is tearing down barriers and building new networks among nations and individuals and economies and cultures: globalization.
We have to be at the center of every vital global network, as a good neighbor and a good partner.
Now, those of us who believe passionately in the power of open trade, we have to ensure that it lifts both our living standards and our values, never tolerating abusive child labor or a race to the bottom in the environment and worker protection.
We should be proud of our role in bringing the Middle East closer to a lasting peace, building peace in Northern Ireland, working for peace in East Timor and Africa, promoting reconciliation between Greece and Turkey and in Cyprus, working to defuse these crises between India and Pakistan, in defending human rights and religious freedom.
We must meet this threat by making effective agreements to restrain nuclear and missile programs in North Korea, curbing the flow of lethal technology to Iran, preventing Iraq from threatening its neighbors, increasing our preparedness against chemical and biological attack, protecting our vital computer systems from hackers and criminals, and developing a system to defend against new missile threats, while working to preserve our ABM missile treaty with Russia.
I predict to you, when most of us are long gone but some time in the next 10 to 20 years, the major security threat this country will face will come from the enemies of the nation-state, the narcotraffickers and the terrorists and the organized criminals who will be organized together, working together, with increasing access to ever more sophisticated chemical and biological weapons.
I also want to ask you for a constructive bipartisan dialog this year to work to build a consensus which I hope will eventually lead to the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Scientists are also working on an artificial retina to help many blind people to see and—listen to this—microchips that would actually directly stimulate damaged spinal cords in a way that could allow people now paralyzed to stand up and walk.
There's a new spirit of service in America, a movement we've tried to support with AmeriCorps, expanded Peace Corps, unprecedented new partnerships with businesses, foundations, community groups; partnerships, for example, like the one that enlisted 12,000 companies which have now moved 650,000 of our fellow citizens from welfare to work; partnerships to battle drug abuse, AIDS, teach young people to read, save America's treasures, strengthen the arts, fight teen pregnancy, prevent violence among young people, promote racial healing.
The American people are working together.
This fall, at the White House, Hillary had one of her millennium dinners, and we had this very distinguished scientist there, who is an expert in this whole work in the human genome.
And tonight I challenge and invite Congress to work with me to use the resources of one picture to repaint the other, to direct the advantages of our time to solve the problems of our people.
Yet, too much Government crowds out initiative and hard work, private charity and the private economy.
Many working Americans do not have health care coverage, so we will help them buy their own insurance with refundable tax credits.
My New Freedom Initiative for Americans with disabilities funds new technologies, expands opportunities to work, and makes our society more welcoming.
We must encourage and support the work of charities and faith-based and community groups that offer help and love, one person at a time.
These groups are working in every neighborhood in America to fight homelessness and addiction and domestic violence, to provide a hot meal or a mentor or a safe haven for our children.
But our Nation should support the good works of these good people who are helping their neighbors in need.
In so doing, we will not hinder the work of our Nation's brave police officers.
Steven is the network administrator for a school district.
Right now, complicated tax rules punish hard work.
We must honor hard work, never punish it.
So I want to work with you to give our economy an important jump-start by making tax relief retroactive.
We will work with our allies and friends to be a force for good and a champion of freedom.
We will work for free markets, free trade, and freedom from oppression.
I've asked Federal agencies to work with California officials to help speed construction of new energy sources, and I have directed Vice President Cheney, Commerce Secretary Evans, Energy Secretary Abraham, and other senior members in my administration to develop a national energy policy.
The framework for reform has been developed by Senators Frist and Breaux and Congressman Thomas, and now is the time to act.
Reform should be based on these principles: It must preserve the benefits of all current retirees and those nearing retirement; it must return Social Security to sound financial footing; and it must offer personal savings accounts to younger workers who want them.
Social Security now offers workers a return of less than 2 percent on the money they pay into the system.
To save the system, we must increase that by allowing younger workers to make safe, sound investments that yield a higher rate of return.
And if we work together, we can prove that public service is noble.
The last time we met in this Chamber, the mothers and daughters of Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or going to school.
Thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and coalition partners, hundreds of terrorists have been arrested.
Our soldiers, working with the Bosnian Government, seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb our Embassy.
We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their state sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make and deliver weapons of mass destruction.
And as government works to better secure our homeland, America will continue to depend on the eyes and ears of alert citizens.
Yet, American workers want more than unemployment checks; they want a steady paycheck.
When America works, America prospers, so my economic security plan can be summed up in one word: jobs.
Republicans and Democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no child is left behind.
I was proud to work with members of both parties: Chairman John Boehner and Congressman George Miller; Senator Judd Gregg.
And I was so proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my friend Ted Kennedy.
[Laughter] I know the folks at the Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say such a thing— [laughter]—but our work on this bill shows what is possible if we set aside posturing and focus on results.
For the sake of American workers, let's pass a stimulus package.
I ask Congress to join me this year to enact a patients' bill of rights, to give uninsured workers credits to help buy health coverage, to approve an historic increase in the spending for veterans' health, and to give seniors a sound and modern Medicare system that includes coverage for prescription drugs.
Employees who have worked hard and saved all their lives should not have to risk losing everything if their company fails.
We must make Social Security financially stable and allow personal retirement accounts for younger workers who choose them.
Members, you and I will work together in the months ahead on other issues: productive farm policy; a cleaner environment; broader homeownership, especially among minorities; and ways to encourage the good work of charities and faith-based groups.
America needs retired doctors and nurses who can be mobilized in major emergencies, volunteers to help police and fire departments, transportation and utility workers well-trained in spotting danger.
Our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our communities.
America is working with Russia and China and India, in ways we have never before, to achieve peace and prosperity.
We will work for a prosperity that is broadly shared, and we will answer every danger and every enemy that threatens the American people.
During the last 2 years, we have seen what can be accomplished when we work together.
And under my plan, as soon as I've signed the bill, this extra money will start showing up in workers' paychecks.
We must work together to fund only our most important priorities.
As we continue to work together to keep Social Security sound and reliable, we must offer younger workers a chance to invest in retirement accounts that they will control and they will own.
Instead, we must work toward a system in which all Americans have a good insurance policy, choose their own doctors, and seniors and low-income Americans receive the help they need.
Yet there's power, wonder-working power, in the goodness and idealism and faith of the American people.
Americans are doing the work of compassion every day, visiting prisoners, providing shelter for battered women, bringing companionship to lonely seniors.
These good works deserve our praise.
Our Nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing work.
And in this work, we must not overlook the weakest among us.
And to meet a severe and urgent crisis abroad, tonight I propose the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, a work of mercy beyond all current international efforts to help the people of Africa.
There's never a day when I do not learn of another threat or receive reports of operations in progress or give an order in this global war against a scattered network of killers.
We are working closely with other nations to prevent further attacks.
We've intensified security at the borders and ports of entry, posted more than 50,000 newly trained Federal screeners in airports, begun inoculating troops and first-responders against smallpox, and are deploying the Nation's first early warning network of sensors to detect biological attack.
Since September the 11th, our intelligence and law enforcement agencies have worked more closely than ever to track and disrupt the terrorists.
We're working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union and to strengthen global treaties banning the production and shipment of missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction.
Throughout the 1990s, the United States relied on a negotiated framework to keep North Korea from gaining nuclear weapons.
America is working with the countries of the region, South Korea, Japan, China, and Russia, to find a peaceful solution and to show the North Korean Government that nuclear weapons will bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and continued hardship.
The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the 1990s that Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had a design for a nuclear weapon, and was working on five different methods of enriching uranium for a bomb.
But chemical agents, lethal viruses, and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained.
Americans are proving once again to be the hardest working people in the world.
The tax relief you passed is working.
Tonight Members of Congress can take pride in the great works of compassion and reform that skeptics had thought impossible.
We've not come all this way, through tragedy and trial and war, only to falter and leave our work unfinished.
The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right.
Today, our coalition is working with the Iraqi Governing Council to draft a basic law with a bill of rights.
We're working with Iraqis and the United Nations to prepare for a transition to full Iraqi sovereignty by the end of June.
I will send you a proposal to double the budget of the National Endowment for Democracy and to focus its new work on the development of free elections and free markets, free press, and free labor unions in the Middle East.
And above all, we will finish the historic work of democracy in Afghanistan and Iraq so those nations can light the way for others and help transform a troubled part of the world.
Americans took those dollars and put them to work, driving this economy forward.
As technology transforms the way almost every job is done, America becomes more productive and workers need new skills.
At the same time, we must ensure that older students and adults can gain the skills they need to find work now.
I propose increasing our support for America's fine community colleges, so they can—I do so, so they can train workers for industries that are creating the most new jobs.
My administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up new markets for America's entrepreneurs and manufacturers and farmers, to create jobs for American workers.
Younger workers should have the opportunity to build a nest egg by saving part of their Social Security taxes in a personal retirement account.
I propose a new temporary-worker program to match willing foreign workers with willing employers when no Americans can be found to fill the job.
This reform will be good for our economy because employers will find needed workers in an honest and orderly system.
A temporary-worker program will help protect our homeland, allowing Border Patrol and law enforcement to focus on true threats to our national security.
My temporary-worker program will preserve the citizenship path for those who respect the law while bringing millions of hard-working men and women out from the shadows of American life.
Members of Congress, we must work together to help control those costs and extend the benefits of modern medicine throughout our country.
Small businesses should be able to band together and negotiate for lower insurance rates, so they can cover more workers with health insurance.
To protect the doctor-patient relationship and keep good doctors doing good work, we must eliminate wasteful and frivolous medical lawsuits.
When it comes to helping children make right choices, there is work for all of us to do.
All of us, parents and schools and government, must work together to counter the negative influence of the culture and to send the right messages to our children.
Religious charities of every creed are doing some of the most vital work in our country: mentoring children, feeding the hungry, taking the hand of the lonely.
In the past, we've worked together to bring mentors to children of prisoners and provide treatment for the addicted and help for the homeless.
We know from long experience that if they can't find work or a home or help, they are much more likely to commit crime and return to prison.
Tonight, with a healthy, growing economy, with more Americans going back to work, with our Nation an active force for good in the world, the state of our Union is confident and strong.
We will help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better career by reforming our job training system and strengthening America's community colleges.
I ask Congress to move forward on a comprehensive health care agenda with tax credits to help low-income workers buy insurance, a community health center in every poor county, improved information technology to prevent medical error and needless costs, association health plans for small businesses and their employees, expanded health savings accounts, and medical liability reform that will reduce health care costs and make sure patients have the doctors and care they need.
And when their recommendations are delivered, you and I will work together to give this Nation a Tax Code that is progrowth, easy to understand, and fair to all.
We should not be content with laws that punish hard-working people who want only to provide for their families and deny businesses willing workers and invite chaos at our border.
It is time for an immigration policy that permits temporary-guest workers to fill jobs Americans will not take, that rejects amnesty, that tells us who is entering and leaving our country, and that closes the border to drug dealers and terrorists.
For younger workers, the Social Security system has serious problems that will grow worse with time.
And a half century ago, about 16 workers paid into the system for each person drawing benefits.
And instead of 16 workers paying in for every beneficiary, right now it's only about 3 workers.
And over the next few decades, that number will fall to just 2 workers per beneficiary.
With each passing year, fewer workers are paying ever-higher benefits to an ever-larger number of retirees.
I will work with Members of Congress to find the most effective combination of reforms.
And we must take care that any changes in the system are gradual, so younger workers have years to prepare and plan for their future.
As we fix Social Security, we also have the responsibility to make the system a better deal for younger workers.
Here is how the idea works.
If you're a younger worker, I believe you should be able to set aside part of that money in your own retirement account, so you can build a nest egg for your own future.
And we'll make sure this plan is fiscally responsible by starting personal retirement accounts gradually and raising the yearly limits on contributions over time, eventually permitting all workers to set aside 4 percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts.
Personal retirement accounts should be familiar to Federal employees, because you already have something similar called the Thrift Savings Plan, which lets workers deposit a portion of their paychecks into any of five different broadly based investment funds.
I will work with Congress to ensure that human embryos are not created for experimentation or grown for body parts and that human life is never bought or sold as a commodity.
Police and firefighters, air marshals, researchers, and so many others are working every day to make our homeland safer, and we thank them all.
Our Nation, working with allies and friends, has also confronted the enemy abroad with measures that are determined, successful, and continuing.
The Al Qaida terror network that attacked our country still has leaders, but many of its top commanders have been removed.
We're working closely with the governments in Asia to convince North Korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions.
To promote peace and stability in the broader Middle East, the United States will work with our friends in the region to fight the common threat of terror, while we encourage a higher standard of freedom.
We are working with European allies to make clear to the Iranian regime that it must give up its uranium enrichment program and any plutonium reprocessing and end its support for terror.
The new political situation in Iraq opens a new phase of our work in that country.
By allowing radical Islam to work its will, by leaving an assaulted world to fend for itself, we would signal to all that we no longer believe in our own ideals or even in our own courage.
We remain on the offensive against terror networks.
Our work in Iraq is difficult because our enemy is brutal.
The Palestinian people have voted in elections, and now the leaders of Hamas must recognize Israel, disarm, reject terrorism, and work for lasting peace.
In all these areas—from the disruption of terror networks, to victory in Iraq, to the spread of freedom and hope in troubled regions—we need the support of our friends and allies.
In the last 5 years, the tax relief you passed has left $880 billion in the hands of American workers, investors, small businesses, and families.
I am pleased that Members of Congress are working on earmark reform, because the Federal budget has too many special interest projects.
We need to put aside partisan politics and work together and get this problem solved.
With open markets and a level playing field, no one can outproduce or outcompete the American worker.
And we must have a rational, humane guest-worker program that rejects amnesty, allows temporary jobs for people who seek them legally, and reduces smuggling and crime at the border.
We will strengthen health savings accounts, making sure individuals and small-business employees can buy insurance with the same advantages that people working for big businesses now get.
We will do more to make this coverage portable, so workers can switch jobs without having to worry about losing their health insurance.
Our greatest advantage in the world has always been our educated, hard-working, ambitious people.
This funding will support the work of America's most creative minds as they explore promising areas such as nanotechnology, supercomputing, and alternative energy sources.
Honorable people in both parties are working on reforms to strengthen the ethical standards of Washington.
And this good work is being led by our First Lady, Laura Bush.
As we recover from a disaster, let us also work for the day when all Americans are protected by justice, equal in hope, and rich in opportunity.
We will also lead a nationwide effort, working closely with African American churches and faith-based groups, to deliver rapid HIV tests to millions, end the stigma of AIDS, and come closer to the day when there are no new infections in America.
Like many before us, we can work through our differences, and we can achieve big things for the American people.
Our citizens don't much care which side of the aisle we sit on, as long as we're willing to cross that aisle when there is work to be done.
So let us work together to reform the budget process, expose every earmark to the light of day and to a vote in Congress, and cut the number and cost of earmarks at least in half by the end of this session.
So let us work together and do it now.
The No Child Left Behind Act has worked for America's children, and I ask Congress to reauthorize this good law.
I have asked the Secretary of Health and Human Services to work with Congress to take existing Federal funds and use them to create Affordable Choices grants.
Yet even with all these steps, we cannot fully secure the border unless we take pressure off the border, and that requires a temporary-worker program.
We should establish a legal and orderly path for foreign workers to enter our country to work on a temporary basis.
We'll enforce our immigration laws at the worksite and give employers the tools to verify the legal status of their workers, so there's no excuse left for violating the law.
Let us build on the work we've done and reduce gasoline usage in the United States by 20 percent in the next 10 years.
The evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11 is still at work in the world.
Our country is pursuing a new strategy in Iraq, and I ask you to give it a chance to work.
And that's why it's important to work together so our Nation can see this great effort through.
Both parties and both branches should work in close consultation.
We're working with Jordan and Saudi Arabia and Egypt and the Gulf States to increase support for Iraq's Government.
Our work in the world is also based on a timeless truth: To whom much is given, much is required.
In the work ahead, we must be guided by the philosophy that made our Nation great.
This is a good agreement that will keep our economy growing and our people working, and this Congress must pass it as soon as possible.
We have other work to do on taxes.
Now we must work together to increase accountability, add flexibilities for States and districts, reduce the number of high school dropouts, provide extra help for struggling schools.
On trade, we must trust American workers to compete with anyone in the world and empower them by opening up new markets overseas.
So we're working to break down barriers to trade and investment wherever we can.
We're working for a successful Doha round of trade talks, and we must complete a good agreement this year.
I ask Congress to reauthorize and reform trade adjustment assistance so we can help these displaced workers learn new skills and find new jobs.
We're increasing worksite enforcement, deploying fences and advanced technologies to stop illegal crossings.
Yet we also need to acknowledge that we will never fully secure our border until we create a lawful way for foreign workers to come here and support our economy.
We gave our troops a new mission: work with the Iraqi forces to protect the Iraqi people, pursue the enemy in its strongholds, and deny the terrorists sanctuary anywhere in the country.
While the enemy is still dangerous and more work remains, the American and Iraqi surges have achieved results few of us could have imagined just 1 year ago.
Ladies and gentlemen, some may deny the surge is working, but among the terrorists there is no doubt.
In the coming year, we will work with Iraqi leaders as they build on the progress they're making toward political reconciliation.
We must do the difficult work today so that years from now, people will look back and say that this generation rose to the moment, prevailed in a tough fight, and left behind a more hopeful region and a safer America.
With your help, we're working to cut by half the number of malaria-related deaths in 15 African nations.
They exist in our laboratories and our universities, in our fields and our factories, in the imaginations of our entrepreneurs and the pride of the hardest working people on Earth.
As soon as I took office, I asked this Congress to send me a recovery plan by President's Day that would put people back to work and put money in their pockets, not because I believe in bigger Government--I don't--not because I'm not mindful of the massive debt we've inherited--I am.
Because of this plan, 95 percent of working households in America will receive a tax cut; a tax cut that you will see in your paychecks beginning on April 1st.
Now, I know there are some in this Chamber and watching at home who are skeptical of whether this plan will work, and I understand that skepticism.
I will not send--I will not spend a single penny for the purpose of rewarding a single Wall Street executive, but I will do whatever it takes to help the small business that can't pay its workers or the family that has saved and still can't get a mortgage.
And then some company will hire workers to build it.
And then those workers will have money to spend.
And we will put Americans to work making our homes and buildings more efficient so that we can save billions of dollars on our energy bills.
When it was days old, this Congress passed a law to provide and protect health insurance for 11 million American children whose parents work full time.
Now, there will be many different opinions and ideas about how to achieve reform, and that's why I'm bringing together businesses and workers, doctors and health care providers, Democrats and Republicans to begin work on this issue next week.
It is our responsibility as lawmakers and as educators to make this system work.
In the end, there is no program or policy that can substitute for a parent, for a mother or father who will attend those parent-teacher conferences or help with homework or turn off the TV, put away the video games, read to their child.
In this budget, we will end education programs that don't work and end direct payments to large agribusiness that don't need them.
In fact--not a dime--in fact, the recovery plan provides a tax cut--that's right, a tax cut--for 95 percent of working families.
And to respond to an economic crisis that is global in scope, we are working with the nations of the G-20 to restore confidence in our financial system, avoid the possibility of escalating protectionism, and spur demand for American goods in markets across the globe.
I think of Leonard Abess, a bank president from Miami who reportedly cashed out of his company, took a $60 million bonus, and gave it out to all 399 people who worked for him, plus another 72 who used to work for him.
One in 10 Americans still cannot find work.
This recession has also compounded the burdens that America's families have been dealing with for decades: the burden of working harder and longer for less, of being unable to save enough to retire or help kids with college.
The toughest to read are those written by children asking why they have to move from their home, asking when their mom or dad will be able to go back to work.
They don't understand why it seems like bad behavior on Wall Street is rewarded, but hard work on Main Street isn't, or why Washington has been unable or unwilling to solve any of our problems.
And what the American people hope, what they deserve, is for all of us, Democrats and Republicans, to work through our differences, to overcome the numbing weight of our politics.
We cut taxes for 95 percent of working families.
[Laughter]    As a result, millions of Americans had more to spend on gas and food and other necessities, all of which helped businesses keep more workers.
Now, because of the steps we took, there are about 2 million Americans working right now who would otherwise be unemployed.
Two hundred thousand work in construction and clean energy.
Three hundred thousand are teachers and other education workers.
Talk to the small business in Phoenix that will triple its workforce because of the Recovery Act.
Talk to the window manufacturer in Philadelphia who said he used to be skeptical about the Recovery Act, until he had to add two more work shifts just because of the business it created.
But Government can create the conditions necessary for businesses to expand and hire more workers.
We should start where most new jobs do, in small businesses, companies that begin when an entrepreneur takes a chance on a dream or a worker decides it's time she became her own boss.
I'm also proposing a new small business tax credit, one that will go to over 1 million small businesses who hire new workers or raise wages.
Next, we can put Americans to work today building the infrastructure of tomorrow.
Tomorrow I'll visit Tampa, Florida, where workers will soon break ground on a new high-speed railroad funded by the Recovery Act.
We should put more Americans to work building clean energy facilities and give rebates to Americans who make their homes more energy efficient, which supports clean energy jobs.
People are out of work.
You can see the results of last year's investments in clean energy in the North Carolina company that will create 1,200 jobs nationwide helping to make advanced batteries or in the California business that will put a thousand people to work making solar panels.
When we renew the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we will work with Congress to expand these reforms to all 50 States.
That's why I urge the Senate to follow the House and pass a bill that will revitalize our community colleges, which are a career pathway to the children of so many working families.
That's why we're nearly doubling the childcare tax credit and making it easier to save for retirement by giving access to every worker a retirement account and expanding the tax credit for those who start a nest egg.
That's why we're working to lift the value of a family's single largest investment, their home.
Like any cash-strapped family, we will work within a budget to invest in what we need and sacrifice what we don't.
We will continue to go through the budget, line by line, page by page, to eliminate programs that we can't afford and don't work.
To help working families, we'll extend our middle class tax cuts.
That's how budgeting works.
We face a deficit of trust, deep and corrosive doubts about how Washington works that have been growing for years.
To close that credibility gap, we have to take action on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue to end the outsized influence of lobbyists, to do our work openly, to give our people the Government they deserve.
Of course, none of these reforms will even happen if we don't also reform how we work with one another.
That's the work we began last year.
We will reward good governance, work to reduce corruption, and support the rights of all Afghans, men and women alike.
We're working through the G-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery.
We're working with Muslim communities around the world to promote science and education and innovation.
That's why, as we meet here tonight, over 10,000 Americans are working with many nations to help the people of Haiti recover and rebuild.
This year, I will work with Congress and our military to finally repeal the law that denies gay Americans the right to serve the country they love because of who they are.
We're going to crack down on violations of equal pay laws so that women get equal pay for an equal day's work.
And we should continue the work of fixing our broken immigration system, to secure our borders and enforce our laws and ensure that everyone who plays by the rules can contribute to our economy and enrich our Nation.
Each of these institutions are full of honorable men and women doing important work that helps our country prosper.
What comes of this moment will be determined not by whether we can sit together tonight, but whether we can work together tomorrow.
It's whether the hard work and industry of our people is rewarded.
That's the project the American people want us to work on--together.
If you worked hard, chances are you'd have a job for life, with a decent paycheck and good benefits and the occasional promotion.
Maybe you'd even have the pride of seeing your kids work at the same company.
In a single generation, revolutions in technology have transformed the way we live, work, and do business.
Steel mills that once needed 1,000 workers can now do the same work with 100.
Today, just about any company can set up shop, hire workers, and sell their products wherever there's an Internet connection.
No workers are more productive than ours.
To meet this goal, we will need them all, and I urge Democrats and Republicans to work together to make it happen.
Only parents can make sure the TV is turned off and homework gets done.
We need to teach them that success is not a function of fame or PR, but of hard work and discipline.
That's why instead of just pouring money into a system that's not working, we launched a competition called Race to the Top.
You see, we know what's possible from our children when reform isn't just a top-down mandate, but the work of local teachers and principals, school boards and communities.
Many of the students there used to work in the surrounding factories that have since left town.
One mother of two, a woman named Kathy Proctor, had worked in the furniture industry since she was 18 years old.
Some are the children of undocumented workers, who had nothing to do with the actions of their parents.
And I am prepared to work with Republicans and Democrats to protect our borders, enforce our laws, and address the millions of undocumented workers who are now living in the shadows.
We'll put more Americans to work repairing crumbling roads and bridges.
Those with accountants or lawyers to work the system can end up paying no taxes at all.
Now, before I took office, I made it clear that we would enforce our trade agreements and that I would only sign deals that keep faith with American workers and promote American jobs.
If you have ideas about how to improve this law by making care better or more affordable, I am eager to work with you.
Already, we've frozen the salaries of hard-working Federal employees for the next 2 years.
In the coming year, we'll also work to rebuild people's faith in the institution of Government.
And because we've begun this work, tonight we can say that American leadership has been renewed and America's standing has been restored.
This year, we will work with nearly 50 countries to begin a transition to an Afghan lead, and this July, we will begin to bring our troops home.
We should have no illusions about the work ahead of us.
That dream is why a working class kid from Scranton can sit behind me.
It's what drove those students at Forsyth Tech to learn a new skill and work towards the future.
His employees worked around the clock to manufacture the necessary drilling equipment, and Brandon left for Chile.
Along with others, he began drilling a 2,000-foot hole into the ground, working 3 or 4 hour--3 or 4 days at a time without any sleep.
He'd already gone back home, back to work on his next project.
These achievements are a testament to the courage, selflessness, and teamwork of America's Armed Forces.
They work together.
Think about the America within our reach: a country that leads the world in educating its people; an America that attracts a new generation of high-tech manufacturing and high-paying jobs; a future where we're in control of our own energy and our security and prosperity aren't so tied to unstable parts of the world; an economy built to last, where hard work pays off and responsibility is rewarded.
My grandmother, who worked on a bomber assembly line, was part of a workforce that turned out the best products on Earth.
They understood they were part of something larger, that they were contributing to a story of success that every American had a chance to share, the basic American promise that if you worked hard, you could do well enough to raise a family, own a home, send your kids to college, and put a little away for retirement.
Folks at the top saw their incomes rise like never before, but most hard-working Americans struggled with costs that were growing, paychecks that weren't, and personal debt that kept piling up.
It was wrong, it was irresponsible, and it plunged our economy into a crisis that put millions out of work, saddled us with more debt, and left innocent, hard-working Americans holding the bag.
As long as I'm President, I will work with anyone in this Chamber to build on this momentum.
Tonight I want to speak about how we move forward and lay out a blueprint for an economy that's built to last, an economy built on American manufacturing, American energy, skills for American workers, and a renewal of American values.
We got workers and automakers to settle their differences.
We bet on American workers.
And if you want to relocate in a community that was hit hard when a factory left town, you should get help financing a new plant, equipment, or training for new workers.
Over a thousand Americans are working today because we stopped a surge in Chinese tires.
Our workers are the most productive on Earth, and if the playing field is level, I promise you, America will always win.
I also hear from many business leaders who want to hire in the United States, but can't find workers with the right skills.
Growing industries in science and technology have twice as many openings as we have workers who can do the job.
Think about that: openings at a time when millions of Americans are looking for work.
I want every American looking for work to have the same opportunity as Jackie did.
It is time to turn our unemployment system into a reemployment system that puts people to work.
Most teachers work tirelessly, with modest pay, sometimes digging into their own pocket for school supplies, just to make a difference.
Extend the tuition tax credit we started that saves millions of middle class families thousands of dollars, and give more young people the chance to earn their way through college by doubling the number of work-study jobs in the next 5 years.
And colleges and universities have to do their part by working to keep costs down.
Let's also remember that hundreds of thousands of talented, hard-working students in this country face another challenge: the fact that they aren't yet American citizens.
We should be working on comprehensive immigration reform right now.
That means women should earn equal pay for equal work.
It means we should support everyone who's willing to work and every risk taker and entrepreneur who aspires to become the next Steve Jobs.
But he found work at Energetx, a wind turbine manufacturer in Michigan.
I will not walk away from workers like Bryan.
And I'm proud to announce that the Department of Defense, working with us, the world's largest consumer of energy, will make one of the largest commitments to clean energy in history, with the Navy purchasing enough capacity to power a quarter of a million homes a year.
Their energy bills will be a hundred billion dollars lower over the next decade, and America will have less pollution, more manufacturing, more jobs for construction workers who need them.
We've got crumbling roads and bridges, a power grid that wastes too much energy, an incomplete high-speed broadband network that prevents a small-business owner in rural America from selling her products all over the world.
Democratic and Republican administrations invested in great projects that benefited everybody, from the workers who built them to the businesses that still use them today.
Of course, construction workers weren't the only ones who were hurt.
Let's never forget: Millions of Americans who work hard and play by the rules every day deserve a Government and a financial system that do the same.
They make the free market work better.
Right now our most immediate priority is stopping a tax hike on 160 million working Americans while the recovery is still fragile.
That's why we're getting rid of regulations that don't work.
That's not the message we get from leaders around the world who are eager to work with us.
That's why, working with our military leaders, I've proposed a new defense strategy that ensures we maintain the finest military in the world, while saving nearly half a trillion dollars in our budget.
And it means enlisting our veterans in the work of rebuilding our Nation.
Michelle and Jill Biden have worked with American businesses to secure a pledge of 135,000 jobs for veterans and their families.
This Nation is great because we worked as a team.
But we gather here knowing that there are millions of Americans whose hard work and dedication have not yet been rewarded.
It is our unfinished task to restore the basic bargain that built this country: the idea that if you work hard and meet your responsibilities, you can get ahead, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like or who you love.
It is our unfinished task to make sure that this Government works on behalf of the many, and not just the few; that it encourages free enterprise, rewards individual initiative, and opens the doors of opportunity to every child across this great Nation.
Now, our work must begin by making some basic decisions about our budget, decisions that will have a huge impact on the strength of our recovery.
But we can't ask senior citizens and working families to shoulder the entire burden of deficit reduction while asking nothing more from the wealthiest and the most powerful.
The American people deserve a Tax Code that helps small businesses spend less time filling out complicated forms and more time expanding and hiring; a Tax Code that ensures billionaires with high-powered accountants can't work the system and pay a lower rate than their hard-working secretaries; a Tax Code that lowers incentives to move jobs overseas and lowers tax rates for businesses and manufacturers that are creating jobs right here in the United States of America.
But the alternative will cost us jobs, hurt our economy, visit hardship on millions of hard-working Americans.
So let's set party interests aside and work to pass a budget that replaces reckless cuts with smart savings and wise investments in our future.
The American people have worked too hard, for too long, rebuilding from one crisis to see their elected officials cause another.
But tonight I'll lay out additional proposals that are fully paid for and fully consistent with the budget framework both parties agreed to just 18 months ago.
A once-shuttered warehouse is now a state-of-the-art lab where new workers are mastering the 3-D printing that has the potential to revolutionize the way we make almost everything.
And I ask this Congress to help create a network of 15 of these hubs and guarantee that the next revolution in manufacturing is made right here in America.
I urge this Congress to get together, pursue a bipartisan, market-based solution to climate change, like the one John McCain and Joe Lieberman worked on together a few years ago.
But I also want to work with this Congress to encourage the research and technology that helps natural gas burn even cleaner and protects our air and our water.
We'll work with the States to do it.
[Laughter]    So tonight I propose a Fix-It-First program to put people to work as soon as possible on our most urgent repairs, like the nearly 70,000 structurally deficient bridges across the country.
So tonight I propose working with States to make high-quality preschool available to every single child in America.
We know this works.
So let's do what works and make sure none of our children start the race of life already behind.
It's a simple fact: The more education you've got, the more likely you are to have a good job and work your way into the middle class.
But we also have to make sure that America remains a place where everyone who's willing to work—everybody who's willing to work hard—has the chance to get ahead.
And as we speak, bipartisan groups in both Chambers are working diligently to draft a bill, and I applaud their efforts.
We know our economy is stronger when our wives, our mothers, our daughters can live their lives free from discrimination in the workplace and free from the fear of domestic violence.
We know our economy is stronger when we reward an honest day's work with honest wages.
But today, a full-time worker making the minimum wage earns $14,500 a year.
Tonight let's declare that in the wealthiest nation on Earth, no one who works full-time should have to live in poverty and raise the Federal minimum wage to $9 an hour.
This single step would raise the incomes of millions of working families.
In fact, working folks shouldn't have to wait year after year for the minimum wage to go up while CEO pay has never been higher.
Tonight let's also recognize that there are communities in this country where no matter how hard you work, it is virtually impossible to get ahead: factory towns decimated from years of plants packing up; inescapable pockets of poverty, urban and rural, where young adults are still fighting for their first job.
Let's offer incentives to companies that hire Americans who've got what it takes to fill that job opening, but have been out of work so long that no one will give them a chance anymore.
Let's put people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in rundown neighborhoods.
Now, we'll work with local leaders to target resources at public safety and education and housing.
And we'll work to strengthen families by removing the financial deterrents to marriage for low-income couples and do more to encourage fatherhood, because what makes you a man isn't the ability to conceive a child, it's having the courage to raise one.
That's why my administration has worked tirelessly to forge a durable legal and policy framework to guide our counterterrorism efforts.
But now Congress must act as well, by passing legislation to give our Government a greater capacity to secure our networks and deter attacks.
And all this work depends on the courage and sacrifice of those who serve in dangerous places at great personal risk: our diplomats, our intelligence officers, and the men and women of the United States Armed Forces.
Senators of both parties are working together on tough new laws to prevent anyone from buying guns for resale to criminals.
We were sent here to make what difference we can, to secure this Nation, expand opportunity, uphold our ideals through the hard, often frustrating, but absolutely necessary work of self-government.
It captures the enduring idea that this country only works when we accept certain obligations to one another and to future generations; that our rights are wrapped up in the rights of others; and that well into our third century as a nation, it remains the task of us all, as citizens of these United States, to be the authors of the next great chapter of our American story.
An autoworker fine-tuned some of the best, most fuel-efficient cars in the world and did his part to help America wean itself off foreign oil.
Now, as President, I'm committed to making Washington work better and rebuilding the trust of the people who sent us here.
Last month, thanks to the work of Democrats and Republicans, Congress finally produced a budget that undoes some of last year's severe cuts to priorities like education.
And what I believe unites the people of this Nation—regardless of race or region or party, young or old, rich or poor—is the simple, profound belief in opportunity for all: the notion that if you work hard and take responsibility, you can get ahead in America.
The cold, hard fact is that even in the midst of recovery, too many Americans are working more than ever just to get by, let alone to get ahead.
And too many still aren't working at all.
Some require congressional action, and I am eager to work with all of you.
Taking a page from that playbook, the White House just organized a College Opportunity Summit, where already, 150 universities, businesses, nonprofits have made concrete commitments to reduce inequality in access to higher education and to help every hard-working kid go to college and succeed when they get to campus.
They believe—and I believe—that here in America, our success should depend not on accident of birth, but the strength of our work ethic and the scope of our dreams.
That's how the daughter of a factory worker is CEO of America's largest automaker; how the son of a barkeep is Speaker of the House; how the son of a single mom can be President of the greatest nation on Earth.
Let's work together to close those loopholes, end those incentives to ship jobs overseas, and lower tax rates for businesses that create jobs right here at home.
But I'll act on my own to slash bureaucracy and streamline the permitting process for key projects so we can get more construction workers on the job as fast as possible.
Put more Americans back to work.
The all-of-the-above energy strategy I announced a few years ago is working, and today, America is closer to energy independence than we have been in decades.
I'll cut redtape to help States get those factories built and put folks to work, and this Congress can help by putting people to work building fueling stations that shift more cars and trucks from foreign oil to American natural gas.
Meanwhile, my administration will keep working with the industry to sustain production and jobs growth while strengthening protection of our air, our water, our communities.
Every 4 minutes, another American home or business goes solar, every panel pounded into place by a worker whose job cannot be outsourced.
When we rescued our automakers, for example, we worked with them to set higher fuel efficiency standards for our cars.
That's why I directed my administration to work with States, utilities, and others to set new standards on the amount of carbon pollution our power plants are allowed to dump into the air.
She just needed the workforce.
She was flooded with new workers.
That means more on-the-job training and more apprenticeships that set a young worker on an upward trajectory for life.
And if Congress wants to help, you can concentrate funding on proven programs that connect more ready-to-work Americans with ready-to-be-filled jobs.
I'm also convinced we can help Americans return to the workforce faster by reforming unemployment insurance so that it's more effective in today's economy.
Congress, give these hard-working, responsible Americans that chance.
That's why I've been asking CEOs to give more long-term unemployed workers a fair shot at new jobs, a new chance to support their families.
Of course, it's not enough to train today's workforce.
We also have to prepare tomorrow's workforce, by guaranteeing every child access to a world-class education.
And this son of a factory worker just found out, he's going to college this fall.
We worked with lenders to reform student loans, and today, more young people are earning college degrees than ever before.
But it is worth it, and it is working.
So just as we worked with States to reform our schools, this year, we'll invest in new partnerships with States and communities across the country in a Race to the Top for our youngest children.
We're working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges and employers that offer the real-world education and hands-on training that can lead directly to a job and career.
We're offering millions the opportunity to cap their monthly student loan payments to 10 percent of their income, and I want to work with Congress to see how we can help even more Americans who feel trapped by student loan debt.
But we know our opportunity agenda won't be complete, and too many young people entering the workforce today will see the American Dream as an empty promise, unless we also do more to make sure our economy honors the dignity of work and hard work pays off for every single American.
Today, women make up about half our workforce, but they still make 77 cents for every dollar a man earns.
Women deserve equal pay for equal work.
It is time to do away with workplace policies that belong in a "Mad Men" episode.
But Americans overwhelmingly agree that no one who works full-time should ever have to raise a family in poverty.
There are other steps we can take to help families make ends meet, and few are more effective at reducing inequality and helping families pull themselves up through hard work than the earned-income tax credit.
But I agree with Republicans like Senator Rubio that it doesn't do enough for single workers who don't have kids.
So let's work together to strengthen the credit, reward work, help more Americans get ahead.
Today, most workers don't have a pension.
That's why, tomorrow, I will direct the Treasury to create a new way for working Americans to start their own retirement savings: MyI—MyRA.
And if this Congress wants to help, work with me to fix an upside-down Tax Code that gives big tax breaks to help the wealthy save, but does little or nothing for middle class Americans.
Offer every American access to an automatic IRA on the job so they can save at work just like everybody in this Chamber can.
One last point on financial security: For decades, few things exposed hard-working families to economic hardship more than a broken health care system.
They're people who go to work every morning praying they don't get sick.
It's the spirit of citizenship, the recognition that through hard work and responsibility, we can pursue our individual dreams, but still come together as one American family to make sure the next generation can pursue its dreams as well.
Last year, part of the Voting Rights Act was weakened, but conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats are working together to strengthen it.
Citizenship demands a sense of common purpose, participation in the hard work of self-government, an obligation to serve our communities.
In Yemen, Somalia, Iraq, Mali, we have to keep working with partners to disrupt and disable those networks.
In Syria, we'll support the opposition that rejects the agenda of terrorist networks.
So even as we actively and aggressively pursue terrorist networks through more targeted efforts and by building the capacity of our foreign partners, America must move off a permanent war footing.
That's why, working with this Congress, I will reform our surveillance programs, because the vital work of our intelligence community depends on public confidence, here and abroad, that privacy of ordinary people is not being violated.
And we will continue to work with the international community to usher in the future the Syrian people deserve, a future free of dictatorship, terror, and fear.
From Tunisia to Burma, we're supporting those who are willing to do the hard work of building democracy.
We'll keep working to help all our veterans translate their skills and leadership into jobs here at home.
And he's working toward the day when he can serve his country again.
The America we want for our kids—a rising America where honest work is plentiful and communities are strong, where prosperity is widely shared and opportunity for all lets us go as far as our dreams and toil will take us—none of it is easy.
But if we work together—if we summon what is best in us, the way Cory summoned what is best in him—with our feet planted firmly in today, but our eyes cast toward tomorrow, I know it is within our reach.
America, for all that we have endured, for all the grit and hard work required to come back, for all the tasks that lie ahead, know this: The shadow of crisis has passed, and the State of the Union is strong.
He worked construction.
They represent the millions who have worked hard and scrimped and sacrificed and retooled.
Middle class economics works.
Expanding opportunity works.
And these policies will continue to work as long as politics don't get in the way.
Tonight, together, let's do more to restore the link between hard work and growing opportunity for every American.
She and Ben are working as hard as ever, but they've had to forego vacations and a new car so that they can pay off student loans and save for retirement.
Like millions of hard-working Americans, Rebekah isn't asking for a handout, but she is asking that we look for more ways to help families get ahead.
We set up worker protections, Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid to protect ourselves from the harshest adversity.
First, middle class economics means helping working families feel more secure in a world of constant change.
And my budget will address each of these issues, lowering the taxes of working families and putting thousands of dollars back into their pockets each year.
During World War II, when men like my grandfather went off to war, having women like my grandmother in the workforce was a national security priority, so this country provided universal childcare.
In today's economy, when having both parents in the workforce is an economic necessity for many families, we need affordable, high-quality childcare more than ever.
Today, we are the only advanced country on Earth that doesn't guarantee paid sick leave or paid maternity leave to our workers.
Forty-three million workers have no paid sick leave—43 million.
Send me a bill that gives every worker in America the opportunity to earn 7 days of paid sick leave.
That's why this Congress still needs to pass a law that makes sure a woman is paid the same as a man for doing the same work.
And to everyone in this Congress who still refuses to raise the minimum wage, I say this: If you truly believe you could work full time and support a family on less than $15,000 a year, try it.
If not, vote to give millions of the hardest working people in America a raise.
To give working families a fair shot, we still need more employers to see beyond next quarter's earnings and recognize that investing in their workforce is in their company's long-term interest.
We still need laws that strengthen rather than weaken unions, and give American workers a voice.
America thrived in the 20th century because we made high school free, sent a generation of GIs to college, trained the best workforce in the world.
And I want to work with this Congress to make sure those already burdened with student loans can reduce their monthly payments so that student debt doesn't derail anyone's dreams.
Thanks to Vice President Biden's great work to update our job training system, we're connecting community colleges with local employers to train workers to fill high-paying jobs like coding and nursing and robotics.
Tonight I'm also asking more businesses to follow the lead of companies like CVS and UPS and offer more educational benefits and paid apprenticeships, opportunities that give workers the chance to earn higher paying jobs even if they don't have a higher education.
Finally, as we better train our workers, we need the new economy to keep churning out high-wage jobs for our workers to fill.
Since 2010, America has put more people back to work than Europe, Japan, and all advanced economies combined.
But there are also millions of Americans who work in jobs that didn't even exist 10 or 20 years ago, jobs at companies like Google and eBay and Tesla.
Today, our businesses export more than ever, and exporters tend to pay their workers higher wages.
That would put our workers and our businesses at a disadvantage.
And that's why I'm asking both parties to give me trade promotion authority to protect American workers, with strong new trade deals from Asia to Europe that aren't just free, but are also fair.
I intend to protect a free and open Internet, extend its reach to every classroom and every community and help folks build the fastest networks so that the next generation of digital innovators and entrepreneurs have the platform to keep reshaping our world.
We need a Tax Code that truly helps working Americans trying to get a leg up in the new economy, and we can achieve that together.
Helping hard-working families make ends meet, giving them the tools they need for good-paying jobs in this new economy, maintaining the conditions of growth and competitiveness—this is where America needs to go.
Of course, if there's one thing this new century has taught us, it's that we cannot separate our work here at home from challenges beyond our shores.
We will continue to hunt down terrorists and dismantle their networks, and we reserve the right to act unilaterally, as we have done relentlessly since I took office, to take out terrorists who pose a direct threat to us and our allies.
Last year, as we were doing the hard work of imposing sanctions along with our allies, as we were reinforcing our presence with frontline states, Mr.
When what you're doing doesn't work for 50 years, it's time to try something new.
And this year, Congress should begin the work of ending the embargo.
Our diplomacy is at work with respect to Iran, where, for the first time in a decade, we've halted the progress of its nuclear program and reduced its stockpile of nuclear material.
No foreign nation, no hacker, should be able to shut down our networks, steal our trade secrets, or invade the privacy of American families, especially our kids.
In West Africa, our troops, our scientists, our doctors, our nurses, our health care workers are rolling back Ebola, saving countless lives and stopping the spread of disease.
As Americans, we respect human dignity, even when we're threatened, which is why I have prohibited torture and worked to make sure our use of new technology like drones is properly constrained.
Since I've been President, we've worked responsibly to cut the population of Gitmo in half.
As Americans, we cherish our civil liberties, and we need to uphold that commitment if we want maximum cooperation from other countries and industry in our fight against terrorist networks.
As promised, our intelligence agencies have worked hard, with the recommendations of privacy advocates, to increase transparency and build more safeguards against potential abuse.
Yes, passions still fly on immigration, but surely we can all see something of ourselves in the striving young student and agree that no one benefits when a hard-working mom is snatched from her child and that it's possible to shape a law that upholds our tradition as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.
If you share the broad vision I outlined tonight, I ask you to join me in the work at hand.
If you disagree with parts of it, I hope you'll at least work with me where you do agree.
And I commit to every Republican here tonight that I will not only seek out your ideas, I will seek to work with you to make this country stronger.
I want our actions to tell every child in every neighborhood, your life matters, and we are committed to improving your life chances, as committed as we are to working on behalf of our own kids.
Fifteen years into this new century, we have picked ourselves up, dusted ourselves off, and begun again the work of remaking America.
Let's begin this new chapter together, and let's start the work right now.
Speaker, I appreciate the constructive approach that you and other leaders took at the end of last year to pass a budget and make tax cuts permanent for working families.
So I hope we can work together this year on some bipartisan priorities like criminal justice reform and helping people who are battling prescription drug abuse and heroin abuse.
And I will keep pushing for progress on the work that I believe still needs to be done: fixing a broken immigration system, protecting our kids from gun violence, equal pay for equal work, paid leave, raising the minimum wage.
All these things still matter to hard-working families.
We live in a time of extraordinary change, change that's reshaping the way we live, the way we work, our planet, our place in the world.
It's change that promises amazing medical breakthroughs, but also economic disruptions that strain working families.
America has been through big changes before: wars and depression, the influx of new immigrants, workers fighting for a fair deal, movements to expand civil rights.
We made change work for us, always extending America's promise outward, to the next frontier, to more people.
Our unique strengths as a nation—our optimism and work ethic, our spirit of discovery, our diversity, our commitment to rule of law—these things give us everything we need to ensure prosperity and security for generations to come.
Today, technology doesn't just replace jobs on the assembly line, but any job where work can be automated.
As a result, workers have less leverage for a raise.
All these trends have squeezed workers, even when they have jobs, even when the economy is growing.
It's made it harder for a hard-working family to pull itself out of poverty, harder for young people to start their careers, tougher for workers to retire when they want to.
And although none of these trends are unique to America, they do offend our uniquely American belief that everybody who works hard should get a fair shot.
For the past 7 years, our goal has been a growing economy that also works better for everybody.
No hard-working student should be stuck in the red.
It's not too much of a stretch to say that some of the only people in America who are going to work the same job, in the same place, with a health and retirement package for 30 years are sitting in this Chamber.
But they shouldn't lose what they've already worked so hard to build in the process.
But there should be other ways parties can work together to improve economic security.
Say a hard-working American loses his job.
That's the way we make the new economy work better for everybody.
America is about giving everybody willing to work a chance, a hand up.
And I'd welcome a serious discussion about strategies we can all support, like expanding tax cuts for low-income workers who don't have children.
But after years now of record corporate profits, working families won't get more opportunity or bigger paychecks just by letting big banks or big oil or hedge funds make their own rules at everybody else's expense.
[Laughter]    The point is, I believe that in this new economy, workers and startups and small businesses need more of a voice, not less.
The rules should work for them.
This year, I plan to lift up the many businesses who have figured out that doing right by their workers or their customers or their communities ends up being good for their shareholders.
Last month, he worked with this Congress to give scientists at the National Institutes of Health the strongest resources that they've had in over a decade.
And that way, we put money back into those communities and put tens of thousands of Americans to work building a 21st-century transportation system.
Priority number one is protecting the American people and going after terrorist networks.
Some of these places may become safe havens for new terrorist networks.
That may work as a TV sound bite, but it doesn't pass muster on the world stage.
It says America will always act, alone if necessary, to protect our people and our allies, but on issues of global concern, we will mobilize the world to work with us and make sure other countries pull their own weight.
Our military, our doctors, our development workers—they were heroic; they set up the platform that then allowed other countries to join in behind us and stamp out that epidemic.
That's how we forged a Trans-Pacific Partnership to open markets and protect workers and the environment and advance American leadership in Asia.
That's why I will keep working to shut down the prison at Guantanamo.
But it will only happen if we work together.
It doesn't work if we think the people who disagree with us are all motivated by malice.
It doesn't work if we think that our political opponents are unpatriotic or trying to weaken America.
And if our existing approach to campaign finance reform can't pass muster in the courts, we need to work together to find a real solution.
They don't get a lot of attention; they don't seek a lot of fanfare; but they're busy doing the work this country needs doing.
I see it in the worker on the assembly line who clocked extra shifts to keep his company open and the boss who pays him higher wages instead of laying him off.
The protester determined to prove that justice matters and the young cop walking the beat, treating everybody with respect, doing the brave, quiet work of keeping us safe.
Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady of the United States, and citizens of America: Tonight, as we mark the conclusion of our celebration of Black History Month, we are reminded of our Nation's path towards civil rights and the work that still remains to be done.
We have placed a hiring freeze on nonmilitary and nonessential Federal workers.
And with the help of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, we have formed a council with our neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women entrepreneurs have access to the networks, markets, and capital they need to start a business and live out their financial dreams.
That is why my administration has been working on improved vetting procedures, and we will shortly take new steps to keep our Nation safe and to keep those out who will do us harm.
As promised, I directed the Department of Defense to develop a plan to demolish and destroy ISIS, a network of lawless savages that have slaughtered Muslims and Christians, and men and women and children of all faiths and all beliefs.
We will work with our allies, including our friends and allies in the Muslim world, to extinguish this vile enemy from our planet.
More than 1 in 5 people in their prime working years are not working.
Solving these and so many other pressing problems will require us to work past the differences of party.
We must create a level playing field for American companies and our workers—have to do it.
I just met with officials and workers from a great American company, Harley-Davidson.
I am not going to let America and its great companies and workers be taken advantage of us any longer.
Protecting our workers also means reforming our system of legal immigration.
The current, outdated system depresses wages for our poorest workers and puts great pressure on taxpayers.
It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages, and help struggling families—including immigrant families—enter the middle class.
If we are guided by the wellbeing of American citizens, then I believe Republicans and Democrats can work together to achieve an outcome that has eluded our country for decades.
So I am calling on all Democrats and Republicans in Congress to work with us to save Americans from this imploding Obamacare disaster.
Fourth, we should implement legal reforms that protect patients and doctors from unnecessary costs that drive up the price of insurance and work to bring down the artificially high price of drugs and bring them down immediately.
My administration wants to work with members of both parties to make childcare accessible and affordable; to help ensure new parents that they have paid family leave; to invest in women's health; and to promote clean air and clean water; and to rebuild our military and our infrastructure.
Later this year she will get her master's degree in social work.
But to create this future, we must work with, not against—not against—the men and women of law enforcement.
Millions lifted from welfare to work is not too much to expect.
